
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 3
In the context of lower sectional curvature one could do more. Gromov proved in [Gr1] that the local fundamental group 1 is always generated by a uniformly finite number of generators. This gave the first real hints toward finite generation. The next major breakthrough on relating the structure of the fundamental group with geometry came from Fukaya and Yamaguchi [FG]. They proved that on a space with lower sectional curvature bounds the local fundamental group is almost nilpotent. This influential work gave the first real structure theory for the fundamental group. A subtle point in their work is that the index of the nilpotent subgroup of the local fundamental group was not uniformly controlled. This point was resolved in the work of Kapovitch, Petrunin and Tuschmann [KPT]. Fukaya and Yamaguchi went on to conjecture in [FG] that in the nonnegative sectional context a manifold should have almost abelian fundamental group, not just almost nilpotent. An interesting example of Wei [We] shows this conjecture cannot hold for manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature, though the conjecture remains open for spaces with nonnegative sectional curvature.
The results and techniques of Fukaya and Yamaguchi were extended to the context of lower Ricci bounds by Kapovitch and Wilking [KW]. Among the important applications of this extension was to understand that for a manifold with nonnegative Ricci curvature, a finitely generated subgroup of the fundamental group has a dimensionally bounded number of generators. A result by Colding and Naber [CN1] proves that the isometry group of a limit of spaces with lower Ricci curvature bounds is a Lie group, and combining this with their structure, Kapovitch and Wilking [KW] are able to give a fairly comprehensive understanding of the fundamental group in the compact case. In [Wi] Wilking was able to show how a counterexample to the Milnor conjecture must arise from an abelian action.
In low dimensions the Milnor conjecture has been resolved. At its heart this is because one can prove much stronger rigidities in these contexts, and control much more than just the fundamental group. In di- mension two Cohn-Vossen [CV] proved that if M2 satisfies Ric ≥ 0 and is noncompact, then M is flat or diffeomorphic to R2. In particular, that M2 has finitely generated fundamental group is an easy consequence. In dimension three the first major result was by Schoen-Yau [SY], where they proved that if Ric > 0 for a noncompact M3, then it is diffeomorphic to R3. Their proof was unique in comparison to the techniques used in other papers being cited, and relied heavily on minimal surface theory. Their program was expanded on by Liu [Liu], who was able to prove that if M3 satisfies Ric ≥ 0 then M3 is either diffeomorphic to R3 or its universal cover isometrically splits. The Milnor conjecture is again an easy consequence in this context. Recently Pan [Pa1] has given a distinct proof in the three dimensional case.
In addition to the broad points of progress mentioned above, let us also mention some of the more specific lines of attack which have had success over the years. The most rigid result is in the completely noncollapsed case, that is when Vol(Br(p)) ≥ vrn for all large r. In this case Li [Li] showed that the fundamental group is uniformly finite. Anderson [A] generalized this to show that if b1(M) ≥ k and Vol(Br(p)) ≥ vrn−k, then again Mn has finitely generated fundamental group. On the opposite end of rigidity, Sormani [So1] studied manifolds with minimal growth. In particular, if a space satisfies small diameter growth diam ∂Br ≤ ǫ(n)r for all large r, then she showed that the fundamental group of Mn is finitely generated. More recently,
1The image π1(Bǫ(n)(p)) → π1(B1(p)).
 
4 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Pan [Pa2] has extended these techniques in order to show that if Mn has a unique metric tangent cone at infinity, then the Milnor conjecture holds and Mn has finitely generated fundamental group. See also [So2, SW1, SW2, Wu, Pa3, PW, Wa], for many other interesting directions and related results.
1.1. Main Results on Fundamental Groups. The results of Gromov [Gr1], Fukaya-Yamaguchi [FG], Kapovitch-Wilking [KW] and Wilking [Wi] thus tell us that the fundamental group π1(M) of a manifold with nonnegative Ricci curvature is well understood, and locally it is uniformly finitely generated. In particular, even if π1(M) were infinitely generated then necessarily all finitely generated subgroups are C(n)-uniformly finitely generated. The first main result of this paper is to build such an example, and in particular we can take the fundamental group to be the rationals:
Theorem 1.1 (Infinitely Generated Fundamental Group). Let Γ ≤ Q/Z ⊆ S 1 be any subgroup. Then there exists a smooth complete manifold (M7, g) with π1(M) = Γ and such that Ric ≥ 0.
We will outline the constructions in Sections 2 and 3 more carefully, however let us begin with a very rough picture of the space and its properties. There are several topological methods to build spaces with in- finitely generated fundamental groups, with the dyadic solenoid complement being a geometrically popular method. The constructions of this paper are quite distinct.
We will not directly build M, instead we will focus on constructing the universal cover M ̃ with the appropriate group action by Γ. The overall structure of M ̃ , with respect to a basepoint p ̃ ∈ M ̃ , will in many ways mimic that of a fractal snowflake, see Section 2. The ability to build such a fractal structure will rely on a very twisted gluing mechanism. As we move up in scales we can study the local group Γr ≡􏰇γ:d(p ̃,γ·p ̃)≤r􏰈≤Γ,whichwilljumponegeneratoratatimeatscalesrj withΓj ≡Γrj =⟨γj,Γj−1⟩. Note that the local group will always be generated by a single action, what jumps is what this generator will be. At the scales r j when the local group increases the space will look very close to S 3 × R4 with the generating γ j acting by a rotation on both the S 3 factor and the R4 factor.
A major subtlety of the construction of M ̃ will occur between two of the scales r j and r j+1 . At the bottom scale the generating γ j action will rotate both the R4 factor and the S 3 factor, while at the top scale the same γ j only rotates the S 3 factor. Geometrically the space may look like S 3 × R4 at both the r j and r j+1 scales, however one should view these two copies of S 3 × R4 quite distinctly. In particular, the two 3-spheres in S 3 × R4 = S 3 × C(S 3) will necessarily mix together in order to change the behavior of the action. We will see this behavior is closely connected to the mapping class group of S 3 × S 3.
As this point is of some independent interest it is worth discussing it briefly, we refer the reader to Section 9 for a more in depth discussion. Let M0(S3 × S3) ≡ 􏰛[g] : g ∼ φ∗g : φ ∈ Diff0(S3 × S3)􏰜 represent the space of smooth Riemannian metrics modulo diffeomorphisms which are isotopic to the identity. From the perspective of gluing and topology a diffeomorphism which is not isotopic to the identity is a highly twisted object, and thus it is good to distinguish between those which are and are not connected to the identity by a

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 5
continuous path. We can let M+0 (S 3 ×S 3) ≡ {[g] ∈ M0 : Ric > 0} be the subset of metrics with positive Ricci curvature. Note that there is a canonical action of the mapping class group π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) on these spaces given by [φ] · [g] = [φ∗g]. One of the main technical lemmas of this paper is that this action of the mapping classgroupπ0Diff(S3×S3)onthestandardmetricgS3×S3 livesinaconnectedcomponentofM+0(S3×S3):
Lemma 1.2 (Mapping Class Group and Ricci Curvature on S 3 ×S 3). Let g0 = gS 3×S 3 be the standard metric on S3 × S3. Then given φ ∈ Diff(S3 × S3) there exists a smooth family gt of metrics with Ricgt > 0 such thatg0 isthestandardmetricandg1 =φ∗g0. Thatis,theorbitπ0Diff(S3 ×S3)·[gS3×S3]ofthemapping class group lives in a connected component of M+0 (S 3 × S 3), the space of metrics with strictly positive Ricci curvature.
Remark 1.1. Observe that if φ ∈ Diff0(S 3 × S 3) is isotopic to the identity then the above is trivial as one can take gt = φ∗t gS 3×S 3 to all differ from the standard metric by diffeomorphisms. If [φ] ∈ π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) is not the trivial element, the above is of course much more subtle.
An equivariant version of the above will be one of the driving mechanisms allowing us to untwist our actions as the scale increases and slide Euclidean rotations of S 3 × R4 at scale r j to spherical rotations of S 3 × R4 at scale r j+1 . This process will be described in detail in the next Sections.
Topologically we will have that our counterexample M ̃ is 2-connected, but that H3(M ̃ ) is also infinitely generated. We will essentially add one new H3(M ̃ ) generator each time the local group Γr increases in size. That is, every time we stick in more fundamental group we will need some compensating three spheres.
G e o m e t r i c a l l y w e w i l l h a v e a t l a r g e s c a l e s t h a t M t y p i c a l l y l o o k s l i k e a c o n e o v e r a l e n s s p a c e ≈ C ( S 3s / Z k ) for some sphere size s ≤ 1 and k ∈ N. As the scale increases the size of spheres S 3s will decrease until M is close to a ray, and when the ray opens again M will become close to a potentially different lens space ≈ C(S 3s /Zk′ ). This process will repeat indefinitely, and in the case of a Q/Z-fundamental group one can arrange it so that a cone over every possible lens space occurs infinitely often. In particular, the tangent cones of M at infinity will include C(S3s/Zk) for every choice of k ∈ N and 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. It is important to note that the basepoint for the tangent cone at infinity may not always be the cone point itself. In addition to these lens space tangents, by blowing up at the scale of the actions when k → ∞ we will also see tangent cones at infinity of the form R3 × S 1.
We are left with the following open question:
Question 1.1. If Mn satisfies Ric ≥ 0 with n = 4, 5, or 6, then is π1(M) finitely generated?
The techniques of this paper need to be extended to work in lowest dimensions, and so the above are important open questions. Additionally, our examples are quite collapsed in nature. The issue of finite generation is still open in the noncollapsed setting:
Question 1.2. If (Mn, g, p) satisfies Ric ≥ 0 with the universal cover M ̃ noncollapsed, i.e. Vol(Br(p ̃)) ≥ vrn > 0 for all r > 0, then is π1(M) finitely generated?

6 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first author would like to express gratitude for the financial support received from Bocconi Univer- sity. The author acknowledges the support provided by the Giorgio and Elena Petronio Fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study, where a part of this work was conducted. Additionally, he is grateful to the Northwestern University for the hospitality during his visit.
The second author was funded by NSF Grant 1809011 during much of this work.
The last author was supported by the European Research Council (ERC), under the European’s Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, via the ERC Starting Grant “CURVATURE”, grant agreement No. 802689, while he was employed at the University of Oxford until August 2022. He was supported by the Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences with a Marsden Fellowship from September 2022 to December 2022. He is currently supported by the FIM-ETH Zu ̈rich with a Hermann Weyl Instructorship. He is grateful to these institutions, to the Northwestern University and to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, for the excellent working conditions during the completion of this work.
2. GEOMETRIC AND TOPOLOGICAL OUTLINE FOR THEOREM 1.1
The focus of this Section is to describe in broad strokes the Example of Theorem 1.1. In particular, we will begin in Section 2.1 by outlining the main topological ingredients in the construction, and then in Section 2.2 we want to describe the large scale geometry of the construction. Both of these discussions are meant to help draw an intuitive picture as a preamble to the careful construction given in the next Section.
2.0.1. Decomposing the group Γ ≤ Q/Z. Let us begin by choosing in Γ ≤ Q/Z ⊆ S 1 a nested sequence of finitely generated subgroups {e} = Γ−1 ≤ Γ0 ≤ Γ1 ≤ · · · which generate Γ in the sense that for every γ ∈ Γ we have that γ ∈ Γ j for some j sufficiently large. For instance such a sequence of subgroups may be built using that Γ is countable and choosing an enumeration. A finitely generated subgroup Γj ≤ Q/Z is necessarily finite and generated by a single element γj ∈ Γj. In this way we can write
Γj = 􏰇γj,Γj−1􏰈 and ∃! minimal kj ∈ N such that γkj = γj−1 . (1) j
It will be convenient to adopt the notation k≤j ≡ k0 ·k1 ····kj, for j ∈ N and we shall denote by |γ| the order of any γ ∈ Γ. Notice that, with this notation, |γj| = k≤j. There is no harm in assume that kj > 1 for each j, as otherwise Γj = Γj−1.
Example 2.1. Let p b􏰑e a prime and Γ = ⟨1, p−1, p−2, . . .⟩ ≤ Q/Z be the set of rationals which can be written asafiniteseriesγ=􏰑 aip−iwith0≤ai<p−1.Inthiscaseweletγi=p−i,sothatki=pforalli.We havethatΓj={γ= 1jaip−i}. 􏰞
Example 2.2. Let Γ = Q/Z. Let us choose k j to cyclically evaluate at the primes, that is
{kj} = 2;2,3;2,3,5;2,3,5,7... (2)

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 7
and let γj ≡ 1 . Thus Γj is the set of all rationals whose denominators are products of primes up to some k≤j
 order and power. We can take subsequences of {kj} which converge to any prime or to ∞. 􏰞 Example 2.3. Let Γ = Q/Z. Let us choose k j to cyclically evaluate at all the integers, that is
{kj} = 2;2,3;2,3,4;2,3,4,5...
and let γj ≡ 1 . We can take subsequences of {kj} which converge to any element of N or to ∞.
(3)
􏰞
 k≤j
Let us make a few useful observations about the induced structure. For each γ ∈ Γ we can then uniquely
write it as
γ=􏰖γaj , suchthataj <kj, (4) j
j
where at most a finite number of a j are nonvanishing. Note that there is the short exact sequence 0 → Γ j → Γ → Γ/Γj → 0. This does not split as a group splitting of course, however the choice of basis builds for us a splitting of sets
Γ = Γ j ⊕ Γ/Γ j , given by
γ = γ≤ j · γ> j = 􏰖 γai · 􏰖 γai . (5)
Remark 2.1. It is possible, and helpful, to include into the discussion the case where Γ is finitely generated, or equivalently Γ = Γ j for some j. This is more in line with how our inductive construction in Section 3 will proceed. However our main focus is of course on the case where Γ is not finitely generated.
2.1. Topological Outline of (M ̃ , p ̃, Γ). Let us open with the topological construction of M ̃ with its group action by Γ. We will not worry in this subsection about geometry or preserving Ricci curvature. Indeed the viewpoint we will take in Section 3 when we carefully construct our space will be quite different, however the point of view we use here is particularly convenient for understanding the global structure of our space.
2.1.1. Identifying M ̃ with a Directed Graph. In order to visualize the space it is helpful to build the fol- lowing directed graph (V, E) of vertices and directed edges. We should think of each vertex as a copy of S3×D4 ≈S3×R4,anditwillalsobegeometricallyconvenienttoviewavertexasthecentralS3×{0}factor, as then each vertex will represent a generator of H3(M ̃ ). If a va is a given vertex we will sometimes write S 3×D4a in order to explicitly understand that the copy of S 3×D4 we are staring at is the one represented by va.
A directed edge Eab will represent for us a gluing. Given a vertex va ≈ S 3 × D4a note that its boundary is a single S 3 × S 3. This boundary will be glued into the target vertex vb ≈ S 3 × D4b by removing a smaller diskS3×D4b\(S3×D4ab)withD4ab ⊆D4b andchoosingagluingmapφab :∂(S3×D4a)→∂(S3×D4ab).Note that we can identify φab : S3 × S3 → S3 × S3. The exact choices of Dab and φab will be discussed after the enumeration of the vertices and edges is complete, however it is worth pointing out that the φab will be a nontrivial element of the mapping class group, with the goal of twisting our underlying action. We see from
ii i≤j i>j

8 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
the above that we should expect each vertex to be the base of at most one directed edge, although it may be the target of multiple edges.
In order to enumerate our vertices V = {va} it is convenient to decompose them as a disjoint union V = ∪jVj as follows. Recall that we will have a global Γ action on the end manifold, and so for each of our subgroups Γ j let V j = {vaj } represent those vertices whose associated S 3 × D4a j will be preserved under the Γ j action. In this case we will always have that Γ j ≤ S 1 is induced by the (1, k≤ j−1 )-action, which is to say that the generator γj will (left) Hopf rotate the R4 factor by 2π/kj = 2πk≤j−1/|γj| and will (left) Hopf rotate the S3 factor by 2π/|γj| = 2π/(k0 ···kj). We will use the notation
θ ·(a,b) (g1,g2) = (aθ · g1,bθ · g2), (6)
where θ · g denotes the (left) Hopf rotation of S 3 by angle θ. We refer to ·(a,b) as the (a, b)-Hopf rotational action. We will often be viewing R4 = C(S 3), and hence the Hopf rotation of S 3 naturally induces a rotation on R4. Analogous considerations hold for D4, which we view as the ball centered at the origin of R4.
Identifyingtheverticesvaj withgluedcopiesofS3×D4aj intheendmanifold(M ̃,p ̃,Γ),weseethatwe should expect an induced Γ/Γj action on Vj. In fact, this action will be a transitive and free action. Hence we will enumerate V j by identifying it directly with
V j ≡ 􏰅 v aj : a ∈ Γ / Γ j 􏰆 . ( 7 ) Thus as a set we have identified Vj with Γ/Γj, and from the point of view of our construction we will have
one Γj-preserved S3 × D4 neighborhood per element of Γ/Γj.
In order to build our directed graph we also need our edges. Each vertex vaj will be the base one of edge, andsowecanweviewtheedgesasamapE:V→V.Wewillseethateachvertexvaj willbethetargetof kj edges, and indeed on each Vj ⊂ V our edge map is given by
E:Vj→Vj+1 byE[vaj]≡vaj/Γj+1. (8) In particular, as |Γj/Γj−1| = kj we have that if vbj ∈ Γ/Γj then there are exactly kj elements vaj−1 ∈ Γ/Γj−1 for
which vbj = vaj−1/Γj, as claimed.
2.1.2. The Gluing Maps. We have now identified our set of vertices
V = 􏰐 V j = 􏰐 Γ/Γ j , (9) jj
and our edges by E[vaj] = vaj/Γj+1.
Let us fix vbj ≈ S3 × D4b and let vaj−1 ∈ Γ/Γj−1 be the kj vertices such that vaj−1/Γj = vbj. As discussed
in the last subsection, associated to each vaj−1 ≈ S 3 × D4a there is a disk D4ab ⊆ D4b and a gluing map φab :S3×S3 →S3×S3 identifyingtheboundaries∂(S3×D4a)with∂(S3×D4ab).Letusdiscussthesedisks and mappings.

then we can write
[vb] = 􏰖γai ∈ Γ/Γj , (10) ji
i>j
vb ≡e·􏰖γai =􏰖γai ∈Γ/Γj−1. (11) jii
i>j i>j
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 9
To begin, note that in the equivalence class [vbj] ∈ Γ/Γj there is a distinguished element with vbj ∈ Γ/Γj−1. More precisely, if
Then we can identify the elements of vaj−1 ∈ Vj−1 for which vaj−1/Γj = vbj as the collection {γajvbj} ∈ Vj−1
for a = 0,...,kj − 1. Now consider the disk S3 × D4b and let D0b = Br(x0) ⊆ Db be any ball 0 􏰠 B2r(x0)
which is not too close to the origin, and for which r << k−1 . Let xa be the rotation of x0 by angle 2πa/kj, j
and hence Dab = Br(xa) is the ro􏰔tation of D0b by angle 2πa/kj. Note that this is a set {Dab} of kj disjoint balls in D4b. By definition the set a S3 × D4ab is invariant under the action by Γj.
Nowweneedtodefinethegluingmapsφab :∂(S3×D4a)→∂(S3×D4ab),thatismapsφab :S3×S3 → S 3 × S 3 . The challenge is that we need the gluing maps to respect the Γ j actions, and the identity map does not do this. More specifically, if we consider the glued space
􏰌 S 3 × 􏰁 D 4b \ 􏰘 D 4a b 􏰂 􏰍 􏰘 S 3 × D 4a , ( 1 2 ) φab
then we want a well defined Γj action. The Γj action should restrict to the (1,k≤j−1) action on each S3 × 􏰁Db\􏰔Dab􏰂,sothatinparticulartheΓj−1 actiononS3×􏰁Db\􏰔Dab􏰂shouldbethe(1,0)-action. However, this same Γ j−1 action should be the (1, k≤ j−2 ) action on each glued copy of S 3 × D4a . If we unwind this, this is telling us we need a diffeomorphism φj : S3 × S3 → S3 × S3 such that
φj􏰊θ·(1,k≤j−2) (g1,g2)􏰋=θ·(1,0) φj(g1,g2). (13)
In fact we have such a diffeomorphism, see Section 6.1. This diffeomorphism is not isotopic to the identity, a point which causes some trouble on the geometric side of the gluing procedure, see Section 3.1.2 for more on this. For the topological picture we will now define φab : ∂(S 3 × D4a) → ∂(S 3 × D3ab) by
φab(g1,g2)=γaj ·φj(g1,g2).
Note that the gluing maps are built precisely so that the Γ j−1 action on S 3 × D4a extends to an action of Γ j on
thegluedspace􏰌S3 ×􏰁D4b \􏰔D4ab􏰂􏰍􏰔φab S3 ×D4a.
2.1.3. Construction of (M ̃ , Γ). Let us build our global space M ̃ as follows. Having defined our collection of
vertices {va } ∈ V = 􏰏 V j = 􏰏 Γ/Γ j let us first consider the disjoint collection
􏰘 􏰘 S 3 × D 4b j , ( 1 4 )
j Vj
where we have assigned to each vertex vbj ∈ Vj a copy of the disk cross a sphere. Observe that there is a freeactionofΓonthisspace,whereifγ∈ΓthenitsactiononS3×D4bj maybeunderstoodinthefollowing

10 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
manner. Recall that Γ has a set splitting as in (5) defined by our choice of basis, so that each γ ∈ Γ can be written γ = γ≤j · γ>j where
γ≤j =􏰖γai ∈Γj, andγ>j =􏰖γai ∈Γ/Γj. (15) ii
i≤j i>j
Note there is the defined action of γ≤j ∈ Γj ≤ S1 on S3 ×D4bj induced by the (1,k≤j−1) action which Hopf rotates D4 at speed 2π/kj and Hopf rotates S3 at speed 2π/|γj| = 2π/(k0 ···kj). Additionally, γ>j ∈ Γ/Γj naturallyactsonbj ∈Γ/Γj.Thiswilltellusthatγ·:S3×D4bj →S3×D4γ>j·bj.Thisactionisalmostgivenby the composition of the γ≤j action on S3 × D4bj and the identification of S3 × D4bj with S3 × D4γ>j·bj, however there is one slight subtle point. Recall the splitting Γ = Γj ⊕ Γ/Γj is a splitting of sets however and not groups, so to understand the extension of the action of Γ j to Γ let us identify b j ∈ Γ/Γ j as
bj =􏰖γbij , (16) i
i>j where as usual 0 ≤ bij < ki. Consider the product (in Γ)
γ>j ·bj =􏰖γai ·γbij =γcj ·􏰖γci ∈Γ, (17) iiji
i>j i>j
where 0 ≤ ci < ki. Note that 􏰒i>j γci ∈ Γ/Γj is the natural product of γ>j and bj in Γ/Γj, and either cj = 0 or
i cj
cj =1.ThentheactionofγonS3×D4bj isgivenbythecompositionoftheactionγj γ≤j :S3×D4bj →S3×D4bj
and the identity map S 3 × D4b j → S 3 × D4γ> j ·b j . The gluing maps in the previous subsection were built pre- cisely to make this extend to a global action of Γ.
Now for each directed edge Eab j let us remove the corresponding ball Dab j ⊆ Db j as in the last subsection: 􏰘􏰘S3×􏰁D4bj \􏰘D4abj􏰂. (18)
j Vj Eabj
Observe that the action of Γ restricts to an action of the above. Finally let us observe that for each directed edge Eabj we have defined the corresponding gluing maps φabj : ∂(S 3 × D4a) → ∂(S 3 × D4abj ) which were built precisely to commute with the above action of Γ. Thus we arrive at our end space
M ̃ ≡ 􏰌 􏰘 􏰘 S 3 × 􏰁 D 4b j \ 􏰘 D 4a b j 􏰂 􏰍 􏰎 , ( 1 9 ) j Vj Eabj {φabj∈E}
together with its free action by Γ. In (19) it is understood that the boundary components ∂(S 3 × D4a) and ∂(S 3 × D4ab j ) are identified according to the directed edges Eab j ∈ E and via the diffeomorphisms φab j . We refer to Section 3 for an alternative (but equivalent) approach to the definition of the total space M ̃ which has a more geometric flavor.
The homology of M ̃ may be conveniently computed with a Mayer-Vietoris sequence. Indeed, as M ̃ is the gluing of 2-connected spaces whose intersections are all 2-connected, it is clear that M ̃ is 2-connected.

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 11
2.2. Geometric Outline of (M ̃ , p ̃, Γ). We described in the previous subsection the topological construction of the universal cover M ̃ from Theorem 1.1 together with its free action by Γ. In this subsection we want to understand the broad geometry of M ̃ . We will mostly concern ourselves with a rough Gromov Hausdorff picture of what is happening, with only some mild comments toward the finer geometric and topological points. In the next subsection we will introduce a precise inductive construction that will put the pictures of this subsection and the last together more comprehensively. The geometric viewpoint will have a different flavor than the topological construction, as we will focus ourselves more locally as we move up in scale. This will also be the convenient viewpoint for the inductive construction in Section 3.
For a chosen basepoint p ̃ ∈ M ̃ let us look at the ball Br(p ̃) and consider the local group Γr ≡ ⟨γ ∈ Γ :
d, p ̃, γ · p ̃) ≤ r⟩ generated by those actions which move p ̃ at most r > 0. The local groups Γr ⊆ Γ will then
necessarily be monotone increasing, and there will be discrete radii rj at which the local group jumps. We
willhaveforrj ≤r<rj+1 thatΓr =Γj ≤Q/Z⊆S1 asin(1).Inparticular,atscalerj wewilladdonenew
generator Γj = ⟨γj,Γj−1⟩ to the local group. As usual we will denote by kj the minimal integer for which
γkj = γj−1 ∈ Γj−1 becomes the generator of Γj−1. In this way the local group is always generated by a single j
element, and what is happening at scale r j is that this element is changing.
2.2.1. Geometry at Scale rj. Let us then roughly describe what M ̃ looks like on the scales rj, and then next we will even more roughly describe what happens to M ̃ between scales rj and rj+1. At each scale rj the manifold M ̃ will be Gromov-Hausdorff close to a ball in S 3 × R4. Indeed the space will be mostly diffeo- morphic and nearly isometric to S 3 × R4 at scale r j , however as in the gluing construction of Section 2.1.2 there will be k j small balls around the local orbit Γ j · p ̃ which will contain a good deal of topology at smaller scales. It is worth pointing out that for j large the sphere factor S 3 will have scale invariantly decreasing radius, so that from a Gromov-Hausdorff point of view the space is looking increasingly like R4
Note that there is a T2 = S1 ×S1 action on S3 ×R4. The first S1 acts freely on the S3 factor by Hopf rotating. The second S 1 acts on the R4 = C(S 3) factor by Hopf rotating the unit sphere. For (a, b) ∈ Z × Z there is an induced S1 action on S3 × R4 through the homomorphic embedding S1 → S1 × S1 given by θ 􏰀→ (aθ, bθ). That is, the (a, b)-action of S 1 will Hopf rotate the spheres of R4 = C(S 3) at speed b and will Hopf rotate S 3 at speed a. Note that if a and b are coprime then this is a free action. The size of the 3-sphere will be growing, but go to zero relative to rj, and so from a pure Gromov-Hausdorff point of view the space will be close to R4 at the scales rj.
Now on the scale rj the action of the generator γj ∈ Γj will look like a rotation of the R4 factor by 2π/kj,
and a Hopf rotation of the S3 factor by 2π/|γj| = 2π/(k0 ···kj). If we view Γj ≤ S1 then the action of
Γj is the one induced by the (1,k≤j−1)-S1 action as above, where we recall that we set k≤j ≡ k0 · k1 ···kj.
Observe that Γ j−1 is generated by γ j−1 = γk j , and therefore it looks like a rotation of purely the S 3 factor. j
The basepoint p ̃ should not be viewed as the center of the rotation of γj in R4. The center of the rotation ≈ S 3 × {0} will be a central 3-sphere, which from the point of view of the topological construction as in Section 2.1 is a H3(M ̃ ) generator associated to a vertex. The point p ̃ should be viewed as a point of distance

12 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
roughly kjrj from the center of this rotation. In this way d(p ̃,γj · p ̃) = rj and the size of the orbit of the Γj action is roughly kjrj.
2.2.2. Geometry between Scales r j and r j+1 . We have described that at scale r j the space is close to S 3 × R4 and the local group Γ j looks primarily like a rotation of the R4 factor. Let us now discuss very roughly what happens between scales rj and rj+1. Observe that for the picture of the last paragraphs to hold, something substantial must have happened. Indeed, let us consider the group Γj at scales rj and rj+1. At both of these scales the space looks like S 3 × R4 , however the action of Γ j on the bottom r j -scale rotates both factors, while on the top rj+1-scale it rotates only the second factor. In particular the action of the generator γj, which looks mostly like a rotation of R4 on the bottom scale, has slid in to become just a rotation of S 3 on the top scale.
The topological mechanism for this twisting was described in Section 2.1.2, namely we needed to glue these two copies of R4 × S 3 ≈ D4 × S 3 together by a boundary map φ j : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3 which is homotopically nontrivial, and which commutes with the action by untwisting
φj􏰁θ ·(1,k≤j−1) (g1,g2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φj(g1,g2). (20)
Let us give a different viewpoint here which is geometrically convenient. Between scales rj and rj+1 our space will be diffeomorphic to an annulus in S 3 × R4 , or equivalently diffeomorphic to an annulus Arj,rj+1(0) ⊆ C(S3 × S3). Very roughly, we can view the metric on this annulus as dr2 + r2gr, where gr is afamilyofmetricsonS3 ×S3. WeknowthatthetopandbottomscalesareveryclosetoS3 ×R4,andso to first approximation we can say that grj and grj+1 are isometrically very close to a product of two spheres S δ3 × S 13, where the subscript denotes the radius and we are viewing 0 < δ << 1. Note that C(S 13) = R4 and the small sphere is playing the role of S 3 cross factor. However we understand from Section 6 that these isometries are very different, and indeed not even isotopic to one another. That is, even if grj+1 and grj are isometric,astensorswedonothavegrj+1 ≈grj butinsteadhavegrj+1 ≈φ∗jgrj,whereφj :S3×S3 →S3×S3 is a diffeomorphism as above. So although the geometry at scales rj and rj+1 begins and ends at the same point, we should be interpreting these two copies of S 3 × R4 very differently. Step 2 of Section 3 will discuss this in greater detail, and see Section 7 for the precise discussion. Note for precision sake that the metric is not a cone metric at the beginning and end, and that the two product 3-spheres at the top and bottom scales will be of very different size.
Geometrically, the rough description of the geometry of dr2 + r2gr on the region between scales rj and r j+1 is as follows. The metric gr on S 3 × S 3 begins at r j so that the space is isometrically very close to S 3 × R4 = S 3 × C(S 13). As the first sphere is very small, and indeed how small will be scale invariantly going to zero as j increases, this is Gromov-Hausdorff close to R4. Then slowly in r the metric will shrink the second S 3 factor, so that geometrically our space becomes a ray R+. Now the complicated twisting of the cross sections from Section 6 will take place, however geometrically the space will look roughly like a ray this whole time. Finally the metric will reexpand to gr j+1 , which is again isometrically very close to S3 ×R4,albeitaverydifferentcopyofS3 ×R4.

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 13
2.2.3. Transitioning from Scale rj to Scale rj+1. After the action has been untwisted between scales rj and rj+1, let us remark that there is an additional challenge when the next generator γj+1 enters the picture. At scalerj+1 weagainlookclosetoS3×R3,howeverwethensuddenlyseekj+1 copiesofouroriginalspace appear. Geometrically this will occur on very (scale-invariantly) small balls, and so from a broad geometri- cal viewpoint the space will still look Gromov Hausdorff close to R4. These new copies will be identified by the γj+1 action, as our local group has jumped. Step 3 in Section 3 will deal with this issue with more care, and see Section 8 for the precise discussion.
2.2.4. Tangent Cones at Infinity of M ̃ and M. Let us consider a sequence of radii sj → ∞ and understand the limits of (s−1 M ̃ , p, Γ) and (s−1 M, p). After passing to subsequences (and reindexing) we can break
jj
ourselves down into various cases depending on how sj compares to our naturally defined scales rj from
before.
2.2.5. The scales sj = rj. Let us begin with the base case of understanding the sequence (r−1M ̃,p,Γ) on
j
the universal cover. We have determined that M ̃ looks very close to S 3 × R4 at these scales with (scale
invariantly) shrinking sphere factor. In particular, we have that geometrically the tangent cone at infinity along this sequence gives r−1M ̃ → R4. The action of γj at scale rj is visible as a rotation by angle 2π/kj of
j
the R4 factor with respect to a basepoint distance k j away. Therefore to understand the equivariant limit we
need to break ourselves into two cases. Namely, after passing to subsequences either kj converges or not. 2.2.6. The scales sj = rj with kj → k < ∞. In this case the action of γj looks like a rotation with respect
t o a p o i n t d i s t a n c e k r j a w a y f r o m p , a n d s o w e h a v e t h a t ( r − 1 M ̃ , p , Γ ) → ( R 4 , p ∞ , Z k ) w h e r e Z k i s a c t i n g b y j
rotation around the origin and p∞ is a point distance k from the origin. We get that the quotient space
(r−1 M, p) → (C(S 3/Zk), p∞) (21)
j1
limits to a cone over a lens space. The basepoint p∞ of this limit is again a point distance k from the cone
point.
2.2.7. The scales s j = r j with k j → ∞. In this case the action of γ j is looking increasingly like a translation
by Z, and we get that (r−1 M ̃ , p, Γ) → (R4, 0, Z) where Z acts by unit translation. The quotient space in this j
case limits
r−1 M → R3 × S 1 . (22) j
2.2.8. The scales rj < sj << kjrj with kj → ∞. . In the case that kj → k remains bounded there is no
distinction between this case and the last. Therefore, we are only concerned with the case where we have
some subsequence for which kj → ∞. In this situation note with sj , kjrj → ∞ that our Z action is looking rj sj
increasingly like an R action. Our limit in this case becomes (s−1 M ̃ , p, Γ) → (R4, 0, R), where R is acting j
by translation. Our quotient space is therefore limiting
s−1M → R3 . (23) j
  
14 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
2.2.9. The scales sj ≈ kjrj when kj → ∞. Note the action of γj at these scales looks like a rotation by angle 2 π / k j . I n p a r t i c u l a r , w e g e t t h a t ( s − 1 M ̃ , p , Γ ) → ( R 4 , p ∞ , S 1 ) , w h e r e S 1 i s a r o t a t i o n a r o u n d t h e o r i g i n . O u r
j
basepoint is now roughly distance 1 from the center of the rotation. In particular our quotient limit is given by
(r−1M, p) → (C(S2 ), p∞). (24) j 1/2
2.2.10. The scales kjrj << sj << rj+1 when kj → k < ∞. . We discussed that at scale sj ≈ kjrj we have s−1M ̃ looks like R4 = C(S3). As sj increases our cross section sphere S3 begins to decrease in radius until
 j 1 kjrj s
i t l o o k s l i k e a h a l f r a y . T h e r e f o r e w e g e t t h e p o s s i b l e l i m i t s ( s − 1 M ̃ , p , Γ ) → ( C ( S 3 ) , 0 , Z ) f o r a l l 0 ≤ s ≤ 1 .
In the case when s j becomes sufficiently large we get that the limit is a half ray with the trivial action. Our kjrj
jsk
 quotient limits in this range are therefore
(s−1M, p) → (C(S3/Z ), p ), (25)
for all 0 ≤ s ≤ 1.
2.2.11. The scales sj → rj+1. As the scale sj continues to increase to rj+1, we have that the half ray reopens
up so that we again have s−1M ̃ ≈ R4. However, as it reopens the Γj is now a trivial action. As we approach j
scale r j+1 a new γ j+1 action appears and we repeat the above process. 􏰞
Let us make several quick observations about this process. In the case Γ = Q/Z we can choose k j so that
every k ∈ N appears infinitely often, see Example 2.3. Consequently, all of the cones
M ∞ ≡ C ( S 3s / Z k ) , ( 2 6 )
appear as tangent cones at infinity for all s ∈ [0, 1] and k ∈ N. Geometrically, when we start at a scale for which the space M looks like a cone over a lens space C(S 3/Zk), then as the scale increases the cross section shrinks so that the space looks like a half ray. As the scale continues to increase the space expands to again look like a cone over a lens space C(S 3/Zk′ ). However, when it reopens it may appear to be a different lens space.
The last point to remark on is that though every tangent cone at infinity is a metric cone, the pointed limit does not always have the cone point as the base point. This is in agreement with [So1], where we understand some tangent cones at infinity need to not be polar with respect to the base point.
3. INDUCTIVE CONSTRUCTION FOR THEOREM 1.1
Let us now describe our construction for Theorem 1.1 in more technical detail. The proof will be set up in an inductive fashion, where we will build a sequence of pointed manifolds (Mj, pj,Γj) with Ricj ≥ 0 together with free uniformly discrete isometric actions by Γj. This Section will begin with a description of the main properties of our inductive sequence Mj, together with how one proves Theorem 1.1 once this sequence has been constructed. The induction criteria will be such that building (M ̃ , Γ) from the inductive
j sk∞

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 15
sequence will be relatively straightforward.
The remainder of this Section will then focus on proving the induction, namely on how to construct M j+1 from M j in order to complete the induction proof. The construction will boil down to three major steps, and in each step we will state one of our three main inductive Propositions. These Propositions will be proved in remaining Sections of the paper, and thus the proof of Theorem 1.1 will be complete in this Section modulo these main Propositions.
Let us now set the stage for a precise statement of our induction criteria. Recall that we have chosen as
in (1) a sequence of finitely generated subgroups Γj ≤ Γ with Γj = ⟨γj,Γj−1⟩ which are all generated by a
single element γj such that γkj = γj−1 . From the point of view of the topological construction of Section 2 j
we can view the sequence (Mj, pj,Γj) as the manifold obtained under the construction tree with Γ = Γj.
Our geometric construction will be based on a sequence of parameters ǫ j → 0 and δ j → 0. We may begin by choosing any sequence ǫj → 0. Indeed any sequence of constants ǫj < 1 will do, but in our description of the tangent cones at infinity of M ̃ in Section 2.2.4 we have used that these constants tend to zero, which gives a slightly cleaner picture. Let δ1 << 1 also be any small constant, the remaining δj will be chosen based on applications of our Inductive Propositions. We shall adopt the notation As1,s2(p) to denote the annulsBs2(p)\Bs1(p)forany0≤s1 <s2 ≤∞.
Our sequence (Mj, pj,Γj) will inductively be assumed to satisfy:
(I1) There exists a free isometric action by Γj on Mj with rj ≡ d(pj,γj · pj) and rj >> 1.
 kj−1rj−1
(I2) There exists an isometry Φj : Uj ⊆ Mj → Mj+1 with B10kjrj(pj) ⊆ Uj ⊆ B103kjrj(pj) with Φj(pj) =
pj+1,whereUj isΓj invariantwithΦj(x·γ)=Φj(x)·γforallγ∈Γj ≤Γj+1 .
)2.Theactionofγjinthisdomainrotates the cross section S3 of the cone factor by 2π/kj and the S3 factor by 2π/|γj| = 2π/(k0k1 ···kj).
(I3) Mj\UjisisometrictoS3 ×A102kr,∞(0)⊆S3 ×C(S3 δjrj jj δjrj 1−ǫj
1−ǫj δjrj
Remark 3.1. It follows from (I3) that the orbit of the action of Γj has diameter roughly kjrj.
Remark 3.2. It will be clear from the construction that r j+1 → ∞. That is, the scale of the action of the next kjrj
generator γj+1 relative to the orbit of the previous generator γj is tending to infinity.
Before discussing more carefully the structure of the spaces Mj above, let us quickly see that if such an inductive sequence as above can be built, then we are done. Indeed, consider first the Γi-equivariant isometries Φji = Φj ◦ ··· ◦ Φi : Ui → Uji ≡ Φji(Ui) ⊆ Mj. We can take an abstract equivariant pointed Gromov-Hausdorff limit of the sequence (Mj, pj,Γj). However the setup is such that we can also simply define the direct limit
M ̃ ≡ 􏰅 ( x j , x j + 1 , . . . ) : x k + 1 = Φ k ( x k ) f o r a l l k ≥ j 􏰆 / ∼ , ( 2 7 )
2Observe that this is isometrically very close to S 3 × R4 . Indeed, in our setup U j itself is very Gromov-Hausdorff close to S3 ×R4.
  
16 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
where there is an equivalence relation (xj,xj+1,...) ∼ (yj′,yj′+1,...) if there exists k ≥ max{j, j′} such that xk =yk.BytheequivarianceoftheisometriesΦiwehavethatΓjnaturallyactsonallsequences(xk,xk+1,...) with k ≥ j. In particular there is an induced action of Γ on M ̃ . Note that U j ⊆ M j all embed isometrically into M ̃ and exhaust M ̃ , and the restriction of the Γ j action to U j ⊆ M ̃ is the expected action. Thus M ̃ is a smooth Riemannian manifold with Ric ≥ 0 and a free discrete isometric action by Γ, as claimed.
3.1. The Steps of the Inductive Construction. We will break down this inductive construction into three steps. Each will involve a Proposition which will form the main constructive ingredient in the step. Our goal in this subsection is then to discuss these steps and state the Propositions. We will then see how to finish the induction given these results. Future sections will then be dedicated to proving each of these Propositions individually.
The first step will build our background model space B(ǫ, δ) ≈ S 3 × R4. It will form the basis of both our base step of the induction, and also the underlying space for which previous induction manifolds Mj will be glued into in order to form Mj+1. From the point of view of the topological construction of Section 2, there will be one copy of a background model space per vertex in our construction tree. The construction of the model space B(ǫ, δ) is actually a fairly standard one, but it will help with the exposition to isolate it and discuss the role it plays.
The second step will deal with the action twisting described in Section 2.2.2 . Each M j looks like S 3 × R4 at infinity with the action Γj induced by the (1,k≤j−1)-Hopf S1 action. The first step in building Mj+1 is to equivariantly twist M j to a new manifold Mˆ j, so that after our twisting Mˆ j again looks like S 3 × R4 at infinity but this time the Γ j action is induced by the (1, 0)-Hopf action.
The third step of the inductive construction is to take our twisted Mˆ j and glue in kj+1 copies into a new b a s e m a n i f o l d B j + 1 . T h e g l u i n g i s s u c h t h a t w e h a v e n o w e x t e n d e d t h e Γ j a c t i o n o n Mˆ j t o a Γ j + 1 = ⟨ γ j + 1 , Γ j ⟩ action on M j+1 in the appropriate fashion. From the point of view of the topological construction, there will be one gluing per directed edge in our construction tree.
3.1.1. Step 1: The Background Model Space B(ǫ,δ). Our construction will begin by building a back- ground manifold B(ǫ,δ). The space will both play the role of base step in the inductive construction, and additionally when we move from M j to M j+1 the basis for our construction will be to glue in k j+1 copies of Mj into the background space Bj+1. From the point of view of our construction tree in Section 2.1, there will eventually be one copy of Bj per vertex vj ∈ Vj = Γ/Γj.
The construction of B(ǫ, δ) is relatively straightforward, we will simply take S 3 × R4 and slightly curve the R4 factor in order to give it a slight cone angle. The precise setup is the following:
Proposition 3.1 (Step 1: The Model Space). For each δ > 0 and 1 > ǫ > 0 , there exists a smooth manifold B7 = B(ǫ, δ) such that the following hold:
(1) (B7, gB, p) is a complete Riemannian manifold with Ric ≥ 0, it is diffeomorphic to S 3 × R4.
(2) There exists B10−3(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B10−1(p) such that B\U is isometric to S3 ×A10−2,∞(0) ⊆ S3 ×C(S3 ) δ δ1−ǫ

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 17
(3) There is an isometric T2 = S1 ×S1 action on B for which on B\U ≈ S3 ×C(S3 ) the first S1 acts δ 1−ǫ
on the S δ3 factor by a globally free (left) Hopf rotation and the second S 1 acts on the cross sections S 3 of the cone factor by (left) Hopf rotation.
1−ǫ1 12
(4) The S -action induced by the homomorphic embedding S ∋ θ 􏰀→ (aθ, bθ) ∈ T is free whenever
(a, b) ∈ Z × Z are coprime and a 􏰟 0.
Remark 3.3. Thus for each (a, b) ∈ Z × Z we have the induced (a, b)-S 1 action given by the homomorphic
embedding S1 ∋ θ 􏰀→ (aθ,bθ) ∈ T2.
Base Step: Let us then define the base step of our induction as M1 = B(ǫ1,δ1) as above. We will equip M1 with the the isometric group action of Γ1 ≤ S 1 , which is induced by the (1, k0 )-action as above. In
particular, on S 3 δ1
× S 3 we have that the generator γ1 will act by Hopf rotating S 3 by 2π/|γ1| = 2π/(k1k0) 1−ǫ1 δ1
and by Hopf rotating the cross section of C(S 3 ) by 2π/k1 = 2πk0/|γ1|. 1−ǫ1
3.1.2. Step 2: The Equivariant Mapping Class Group and Twisting the Geometry of Mj at Infinity.
By condition (I3) of the induction we know that outside some compact set U j our space M j \ U j is isometric
to S 3 × A102 k j r j ,∞ (0) ⊆ S 3 × C (S 3 ) ≈ S 3 × R4 . Further, we understand that in this region the action of δjrj δjrj 1−ǫj
the generator γ j ∈ Γ j looks primarily like a rotation of the R4 factor. More precisely, it rotates the R4 factor by 2π/kj and it rotates the S3 factor by the much smaller 2π/|γj| = 2π/(k0 ···kj).
δjrj
In Step 3 we will be gluing kj+1 copies of Mj into a model space Bj+1, and in the gluing region we will againhavethatBj+1 ≈S3 ×R4. However,theactionofΓj onBj+1 willlooklikearotationofjusttheS3 factor without any rotational bit on the R4 factor. Thus to accomplish the gluing we will need to modify M j at infinity into a new space Mˆ j, which will again look close to S3 ×R4 but for which the action of γj is now purely a rotation of the S 3 factor.
In order to address this problem let us first consider S 3 × S 3 with the standard metric gS 3 ×S 3 , and let us recallthatif(a,b)∈Z×ZthenwehavetheS1-isometricaction·(a,b) :S3×S3×S1 →S3×S3 whichacts by a times the (left) Hopf rotation on the first S 3 and b times the (left) Hopf rotation on the second S 3. The following will provide for us how the cross sections of our new space Mˆ j will be twisting. It will be proved in Section 6:
Theorem 3.2 (Equivariant Mapping Class Group on S 3 × S 3 ). Let g0 = gS 3 ×S 3 be the standard metric on S 3 × S 3, and let k ∈ Z. Then there exist a diffeomorphism φ : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3 and a family of metrics (S3 ×S3,gt)suchthat
(1) Rict >0forallt∈[0,1]
(2) The S 1-action ·(1,k) on S 3 × S 3 is an isometric action for all gt. (3) g1 = φ∗g0 with φ􏰁θ ·(1,k) (s1, s2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φ(s1, s2) .
Remark 3.4. The diffeomorphism φ : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3 will represent a nontrivial element of the mapping class group.

18 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Remark 3.5. In Section 9 we will discuss how to connect gS 3×S 3 and φ∗gS 3×S 3 for any element of the mapping class group [φ] ∈ π0Diff(S 3 × S 3). However for an arbitrary element of the mapping class group we cannot necessarily keep track of the behavior of an isometric action.
The above tells us that we can find an S 1-invariant family of metrics with positive Ricci curvature which (from an isometric point of view) start and end at the classical S 3 × S 3, however the beginning and ending S 1 actions are quite distinct. Our main use of the above will be to build the following neck region, which will be used to alter Mj to Mˆ j:
Proposition 3.3 (Step 2: Twisting the Action). Let ǫ, ǫˆ, δ > 0 with k ∈ Z. Then there exist δˆ(ǫ, ǫˆ, δ, k) > 0 and R(ǫ, ǫˆ, δ, k) > 1 and a metric space X with an isometric and free S 1 action such that
(1) XissmoothawayfromasinglethreesphereSδ3×{p}∈XwithRicX ≥0.
(2) There exists B10−3(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B10−1(p) ⊆ X which is isometric to S3 × B10−2(0) ⊆ S3 ×C(S3 ) , and
δ δ1−ǫ under this isometry the S 1 action on U identifies with the (1, k)-Hopf action.
(3) ThereexistsB10−1R(p)⊆Uˆ ⊆B10R(p)⊆Xs.t.X\Uˆ isisometrictoS3 ×AR,∞(0)⊆S3 ×C(S3 ), 1 ˆ δˆR δˆR1−ǫˆ
and under this isometry the S action on X \ U identifies with the (1, 0)-Hopf action.
Constructing Mˆ j: Before moving on to Step 3, let us see how the above will be used as part of our
induction process. Thus let us assume we have constructed Mj as in (I1)-(I3) with sphere radius δj. Recall
by (I3) that outside of a compact subset we have that M j is isometric to S 3 × C(S 3 ), and the action of δjrj 1−ǫj
γj Hopf rotates the S3 factor by 2π/kj and the S3 factor by 2π/|γj|. Observe that if we consider the
δjrj
×C(S3 ), then Γj ⊆ S1 can be viewed as a subaction.
Now with any ǫˆj > 0, the precise constant will be chosen later, we have for Rj = Rj(ǫj,ǫˆj,δj,k≤j−1) and δˆj =δˆj(ǫj,ǫˆj,δj,k≤j−1)theexistenceofXj asinProposition3.3,wherewechosek=k≤j−1 =k0 ·k1···kj−1
1−ǫj (1,k≤j−1)-Hopf S1-action on S3
δjrj
1−ǫj
intheapplicationoftheProposition. WecanrescaleXj →rjXj byrj sothatitisisometrictoS3 ×C(S3 δjrj 1−ǫj
) onaregionUcontainingBrj(p),anditisisometrictoS3 ×C(S3 )onaregionXj\Uˆ containingthe
δˆ j R j r j 1 − ǫˆ j
annulus ARjrj,∞(p) . Further, there is a free isometric S1 action on Xj which looks like the (1,k≤j−1) action
on U and the (1, 0) action on X j \ Uˆ . In particular, by condition (2) in Proposition 3.3 and the inductive assumption (I3) there is an induced Γj action on Xj and an open annulus of U ⊆ Xj which is equivariantly isometric to an open annulus in Mj \ Uj.
We can thus glue Xj to Mj in order to produce the space Mˆ j. The space Mˆ j is now isometric to S3 × C(S3 ) outside of some compact set Vj ⊆ Mˆ j, and the Γj action is a pure Hopf rotation on
δjRjrj
δˆ j R j r j 1 − ǫˆ j
t h e S 3ˆ f a c t o r o n Mˆ j \ V j .
3.1.3. Step 3: Gluing Construction. The third step of the construction involves extending the action of Γ j to an action of Γj+1 in order to move from the manifold Mj to the next step of the induction Mj+1. This will occur by taking kj+1 copies of the twisted space Mˆ j, constructed in the second step, and gluing them into a model space Bj+1 ≈ B(ǫj+1,δj+1) constructed in the first step. From the point of view of the topological

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 19
construction in Section 2, there is one gluing per directed edge in our construction tree.
Recall that a model space B(ǫ, δ) is isometric to an annulus in S 3 × C(S 3 ) outside of a compact set, and
ˆ δ1−ǫ
recall that the induction manifolds M are isometric to annuli in S 3 × C(S 3 ) outside of a compact set. We
δ 1−ǫˆ
will therefore outline our gluing constructions purely in terms of annuli, which is where the gluing will take
place. If we can accomplish this with the correct behaviors, we can then glue our model space Bj+1 and inductive manifolds Mˆ j directly into our glued space and finish the inductive construction of Mj+1.
Let us first outline the gluing strategy without worrying about smoothness or Ricci curvature. We will
end with Proposition 3.4, which will state the end construction in a smooth Ricci preserving manner. We
describe this in some generality, with the understanding that we will be applying it as above afterwards. So
letA′≡S3×C(S3 )andletAˆ=S3×B1(0)⊆S3×C(S3 )withΓ≤S1afinitegroupgeneratedby δ1−ǫδδˆ1−ǫˆ k
a single element γ whose order is divisible by k. Let Γ be the group generated by γˆ ≡ γ . Consider the action of Γ on A′ induced by the (1, |γ|/k)-Hopf action. Thus γ Hopf rotates the S 3 factor by 2π/k and the
1−ǫ
S δ3 factor by 2π/|γ|. Let us also consider the action of Γˆ on Aˆ obtained by just rotating the S δ3 factor by 2π/|γˆ | .
Consider k copies of the annulus Aˆa ≡ Aˆ × {a} with a = 0,...,k − 1, and note that ∂Aˆa = S3 × S3
δ 1−ǫˆ
isometrically. Our goal is to glue in these k copies into A′ such that there is an induced Γ action on the
glued space. We will want that Γˆ restricts to the usual actions on both A′ and the glued copies of Aˆ. To be
more precise let x ∈ C(S3 ) be a point which is distance is 102k from the origin. Let xa ∈ C(S3 ) with 1−ǫ 0 1−ǫ
a = 0,...,k − 1 be the k points obtained by Hopf rotating x = x by 2πa/k.
Consider each of the domains Sδ3 × B1(xa) ⊆ A′, and note that their boundaries are diffeomorphic (and nearly isometric) to S δ3 × S 13. Note that the Γˆ action restricts to actions on each of these domains, while the Γ action simply restricts to an isometry between potentially different pairs of domains. We will want to glue Aˆ0,...,Aˆk−1 intothespace
A ′ \ 􏰊 􏰘 S δ3 × B 1 ( x a ) 􏰋 . ( 2 8 ) a
In order to perform the gluing we need to define the gluing diffeomorphisms
φ a : ∂ Aˆ a → S δ3 × ∂ B 1 ( x a ) . ( 2 9 )
Recalling that ∂Aˆ0 = S δ3 × S 13 and S δ3 × ∂B1(x) is nearly isometric to S δ3 × S 13, let us first choose an almost isometry φ0 : ∂Aˆ0 → Sδ3 ×∂B1(x) which is the identity on the first sphere factor. In particular, it follows that φ0 commutes with the natural Γˆ actions on each of these spaces. Let us then define φa : ∂Aˆa → Sδ3 ×∂B1(xa) by
φa(y,a)=γa ·φ0(y,0), y∈Aˆ, (30)
for a = 0,...,k − 1. Note that we could naturally extend the above maps for any a ∈ Z. However, we would have that φk : ∂Aˆ0 → S δ3 × ∂B1(x0) would not be the same mapping as φ0. Indeed, we see that

20 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
φk = γk · φ0 = γˆ · φ0. To understand the implications of this consider the glued space
A ̃ ≡ 􏰊 A ′ \ 􏰘 S δ3 × B 1 ( x a ) 􏰋 􏰘 Aˆ a , ( 3 1 )
a φa
where we have plucked out the k domains S δ3 × B1(xa) and plugged in the new annular regions Aˆa. The new
space A ̃ is still isometrically of the form S 3 × C(S 3 ) near the origin and infinity. The effect of the gluing ˆ ˆ δ 1−ǫ  ̃
maps is that the Γ action on A extends to a Γ action on A. To understand this action, we need to describe the action of γ on 􏰔a Aˆa. The latter is given by
γ·(y,a)=(y,a+1), a=0,...,k−2 γ · ( y , k − 1 ) = ( γˆ · y , 0 )
(32) for every y ∈ Aˆ. In particular, the action of Γˆ restricts to the expected action on each piece of the gluing.
The main Proposition of this step is to show that, up to some altering of constants, the above construction can be smoothed to preserve nonnegative Ricci curvature:
Proposition3.4(Step3:ActionExtension).Letǫ,ǫ′,δ>0with0<ǫ−ǫ′≤ 1ǫ,andletΓˆ≤Q/Z⊆S1 102
be a finite subgroup with Γ = ⟨γ,Γˆ⟩ such that γˆ ≡ γk is the generator of Γˆ. Then for ǫˆ ≤ ǫˆ(ǫ,ǫ′) there exists a pointed space (A ̃, p), isometric to a smoooth Riemannian manifold with Ric ≥ 0 away from k + 1 three spheres, with an isometric and free action by Γ such that
 (1) There exists a Γ-invariant set B10−1(p) ⊆ U′ ⊆ B10(p) which is isometric to Sδ3 × B1(0) ⊆ Sδ3 × C(S3 ′)andsuchthatΓisinducedbythe(1,|γ|/k)-HopfactiononS3 ×S3 ′ ,
1−ǫ  ̃δ 1−ǫ
(2) There exists a Γ-invariant set B103k(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B105k(p) such that A \ U is isometric to A104k,∞(0) ×
S3 ⊆S3 ×C(S3 )andsuchthatΓisinducedbythe(1,|γ|/k)-HopfactiononS3 ×S3 δδˆ1−ǫ 3 aa3 a 3aδ31−ǫ 2
(3)ThereexistΓ-invariantsetsSδ×B2−1(x)⊆V ⊆Sδ×B2(x)withd(Sδ×{x},Sδ×{p})=10k which are isometric to S3 × B1(0) ⊆ S3 × C(S3 ) and such that Γˆ is induced by the (1,0)-Hopf
δ δ 1−ǫˆ
Remark 3.6. It is important to observe that ǫˆ(ǫ,ǫ′) depends on the choices of ǫ and ǫ > ǫ′, however it does
action on S 3 × S 3 . δ 1−ǫˆ
not depend on the choice of δ.
Constructing Mj+1: Let us now apply Proposition 3.4 in order to finish the construction of Mj+1. Let
u s t a k e i n t h e a b o v e Γ = Γ j + 1 a n d Γˆ = Γ j , a n d l e t u s c h o o s e ǫ = ǫ j + 1 w i t h ǫ ′ = ǫ j + 1 · 9 9 . R e c a l l t h a t 100
the construction of Mˆ j in Section 2 depended on a choice of ǫˆj, which had not yet been fixed. Let us now use Proposition 3.4 in order to choose ǫˆj = ǫˆj(ǫj+1). From this we now have from Proposition 3.3 a well defined Rj and δˆj. Finally let us now choose δ = δˆj in the application of Proposition 3.3, so that we have built the space A ̃ j. After rescaling A ̃ j → (Rjrj)A ̃ j by Rjrj observe that there exists U ⊆ A ̃ j which is
isometrictoS3 ×BRjrj(0)⊆S3 ×C(S3 ′),andalsoobservethatthedomainsVa areisometricto δˆjRjrj δˆjRjrj 1−ǫ
 S3 × BRjrj(0) ⊆ S3 ×C(S3 δˆjRjrj δˆjRjrj 1−ǫˆj
).
Finally, let us consider the base model Bj+1 = B(ǫ′,δˆjRjrj) from Proposition 3.1. We see we can glue it isometrically into U ⊆ A ̃ j. Additionally we can isometrically glue Mˆ j into each Va ⊆ A ̃ j. The resulting space is Mj+1. If we define pj+1 = p0j to be the basepoint of the copy of Mj glued into V0, then we can define

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 21
rj+1 ≡d(pj+1,γj+1·pj+1)andδj+1 throughtheformulaδj+1rj+1 ≡δˆjRjrj.Thiscompletestheinductionstep of the construction. In particular, we have proved Theorem 1.1 up to the proofs of Propositions 3.1, 3.3, and 3.4. 􏰞
4. PRELIMINARIES
In our constructions we will exploit the well known expressions for the Ricci curvature in various setups. We will recall and record some of them here with the relevant sources.
4.1. Riemannian Submersions. The first special case we recall is that of a Riemannian submersion with totally geodesics fibers. Our setup is that we have Riemannian manifolds (Mn, g) and (B, gb) together with a Riemannian submersion
F
π : M −→ B . (33)
We will assume throughout this section that the fibers Fx ≡ π−1(x) are totally geodesic submanifolds of M.
Throughout we will let U,V,.. denote vertical vector fields on M, so U,V ∈ TF ≡ V ⊆ TM, and we will let X,Y,.. denote horizontal vector fields on M, so X,Y ∈ T⊥F ≡ H ⊆ TM. Though we have assumed the fibers are totally geodesic, there is still a remaining piece of structure, namely the integrability tensor defined by
AE1 E2 := H∇HE1 VE2 + V∇HE1 HE2 , (34) where our notation VE and HE denote the projections of E to the corresponding subspaces, see [Be, Defi-
nition 9.20]. Recall that if X, Y are horizontal vector fields then
AXY = 1V[X,Y]. (35)
2
For the proposition below we refer the reader to O’ Neil [O] (see also [Be, Proposition 9.36]):
Proposition 4.1 (Ricci curvature for Riemannian submersions). Let π : (M, g) → (B, gB) be a Riemannian submersion with totally geodesic fibers F. Then
RicM(U,V)=RicF(U,V)+(AU,AV), (36) RicM(U,X) = (divBA[X],U) , (37) RicM(X,Y)=RicB(X,Y)−2(AX,AY), (38)
where RicF stands for the Ricci curvature of the fiber with the induced Riemannian metric and RicB is the Ricci curvature of the base, understood as a horizontal tensor on M.
 
22 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Remark 4.1. Note that in the above proposition we have the explicit expressions (AU,AV) := 􏰕g(AXiU,AXiV),
i
(AX,AY) := 􏰕g(AXXi,AYXi), i
divBA := 􏰕 􏰁∇Xi A􏰂 (Xi, ·) , (39) i
where {Xi} is an orthonormal basis of the horizontal space.
It is helpful to record how the Ricci curvature on the total space of the Riemannian submersion changes when we perform the so called canonical variation of the metric, i.e. we define gt by leaving the horizontal distribution unchanged, the metric on the base unchanged, and scaling the metric on the fibers by a factor t. Below we shall assume again that the fibers are totally geodesic, see [Be, Proposition 9.70].
Corollary 4.2. Let π : (M, g) → (B, gB) be a Riemannian submersion with totally geodesic fibers and let gt the Riemannian metric on M obtained by scaling the fibers metrics with a factor t. Then
Rict(U,V) =RicF(U,U)+t2(AU,AV), (40) Rict(X, U) = t (divBA[X], U) , (41) Rict(X,Y)=RicB(X,Y)−2t(AX,AY) . (42)
Above, A denotes the integrability tensor of the Riemannian submersion π : (M, g) → (B, gB). A particularly natural form of Riemannian submersion is obtained via principal bundles:
G
Definition 4.3 (Riemannian Principal Bundle). We call a principal G-bundle P −→ B a Riemannian G-
principal bundle if it is equipped with a Riemannian metric gP which is invariant under the G-action.
Observe that if P is a Riemannian G-principal bundle then it well defines a metric gB on the base B through the quotient, and as the horizontal distribution H = (TGx)⊥ is right invariant it well defines a prin- cipal connection ξ ∈ Ω1(P;g). The remaining information is a family of right invariant metrics on the G fibers, which may equivalently be viewed as a metric on the adjoint vector bundle over B. Conversely, this triple of data well defines a metric gP on P which is invariant under the G action.
Consider the case when G is simple and there exists a unique bi-invariant metric ⟨, ⟩ on G up to scaling. Then given a metric gB on the base and ξ a connection one form, we can write a Riemannian principal bundle structure on P as
gP(X, Y) ≡ gB(π∗[X], π∗[Y]) + λ(x) ⟨ξ[X], ξ[Y]⟩G , (43)
where λ : B → R+ determines the scaling of the fibers. It follows from Vilms [Vi] that this metric has totally geodesic fibers iff λ(x) = λ is a constant.

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 23
4.2. Riemannian Submersions and Circle Bundles. Let us now restrict ourselves to the case of a Rie- mannian S 1-principal bundle, so that π : M → B is the total space of an S 1-principal bundle over B. Note that if (B, gB) is a Riemannian manifold, then an S 1-invariant metric on M is well defined by the additional data of a principal connection η ∈ Ω1(M) and a smooth f : B → R+ which prescribes the length of the S 1 fiber above a point. If ∂t is the invariant vertical vector field coming from the S 1 action, then we have the expressions
H = kerη,
η[∂t] = 1,
g(∂t,∂t) = f2 . (44)
In the case of an S 1 bundle we have that dη = π∗ω where ω ∈ Ω2(B) is the curvature 2-form, which relates to the integrability tensor A on M by
A(X,Y) = −1ω[X,Y]∂t . (45) 2
The following proposition is borrowed from [GPT, Lemma 1.3], where it was used to show that any principal S1 bundle π : M → B admits an S1-invariant metric of positive Ricci curvature when the base (B, gB) has positive Ricci curvature and the total space has finite fundamental group.
S11
Proposition 4.4. Let M −→ B be a Riemannian S -principal bundle as above with X a unit horizontal
vector and U = f−1∂t a unit vertical vector. Then ∆ff22
 Ric(U,U)=− f +4|ω|, (46) Ric(U, X) = 1 (− f (divBω) (X) + 3ω[X, ∇ f ] ) (47)
   2
Ric(X,X)=RicB(X,X)− 2|ω[X]| − f , (48)
f 2 2 ∇2 f (X, X)
where it is understood, when necessary, that we are identifying the horizontal vector field X with an element
  of T B.
4.3. Doubly Warped Products. A particularly common ansatz is that of the doubly warped factor. Let (Nn1,h1)and(Nn2,h2)beRiemannianmanifolds.ConsiderthespaceM≡(r−,r+)×N1×N2 ⊆R+×N1×N2
g ≡ dr2 + f1(r)2gN1 + f2(r)2gN2 . (49)
12 with the metric

24 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Let X1 ∈ T N1 and X2 ∈ T N2 represent unit directions on N1 and N2 respectively. Then the nonzero Ricci curvatures on M are given by
f′′ f′′ Ric(∂r,∂r)=−n1 1 −n2 2
  f1 f2
Ric(X1,X1)=RicN1(X1,X1)− 1 + 1 − 1 n1 1 +n2 2 ,
f ′′ 􏰊 f ′ 􏰋2 f ′ 􏰊 f ′ f ′ 􏰋 f1 f1 f1 f1 f2
     f ′′ 􏰊 f ′ 􏰋2 f ′ 􏰊 f ′ f ′ 􏰋 Ric(X2,X2)=RicN2(X2,X2)− 2 + 2 − 2 n1 1 +n2 2 ,
     f2 f2 f2 f1 f2
see for instance [Pe], dealing with the case where (Nn1 , h1) and (Nn2 , h2) are isometric to standard spheres.
(50)
In this Section we complete the construction of the base model B(ǫ, δ). It is a straightforward construc- tion, however as we have discussed previously the base models play the role of the S 3 × R4 vertices in the topological construction. As such they are the starting point for each new inductive step and it seems worthwhile to record their geometric properties. Our main goal is to prove Proposition 3.1, which we restate below for the ease of readability:
Proposition 5.1 (Step 1: The Model Space). For each δ > 0 and 1 > ǫ > 0 , there exists a smooth manifold B7 = B(ǫ, δ) such that the following hold:
12
5. STEP 1: THE BASE MODEL
(1) (B7, gB, p) is a complete Riemannian manifold with Ric ≥ 0, it is diffeomorphic to S 3 × R4.
(2) There exists B10−3(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B10−1(p) such that B\U is isometric to S3 ×A10−2,∞(0) ⊆ S3 ×C(S3 )
δ δ1−ǫ (3) There is an isometric T2 = S1 ×S1 action on B for which on B\U ≈ S3 ×C(S3 ) the first S1 acts
δ 1−ǫ
on the S δ3 factor by a globally free (left) Hopf rotation and the second S 1 acts on the cross sections
S 3 of the cone factor by (left) Hopf rotation.
1−ǫ1 12
(4) The S -action induced by the homomorphic embedding S ∋ θ 􏰀→ (aθ, bθ) ∈ T is free whenever (a, b) ∈ Z × Z are coprime and a 􏰟 0.
TobuildB(ǫ,δ)letusstartwiththegeometryofSδ3×R4.NotethatifweviewR4 =C(S13)thenwecan write this metric as
g0 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +r2gS3 . (51) We will warp this metric by considering the ansatz
g≡dr2+δ2gS3 +h(r)2gS3. (52)
If we let a, b, c denote the directions on the first S 3 factor and i, j, k on the second S 3 factor, then we can compute the nonzero terms of the Ricci curvature of this ansatz as

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 25
Let us now consider any smooth function h(r) of the following form:
Ricrr = −3h′′ , h
Ricaa = 2 , δ2
1 − (h′)2 Ricii = 2 h2
h′′
− h . (53)
     r
h(r)≡h′′ <0, 
10−4 +(1−ǫ)(r−10−4)
−5 ifr≤10 ,
if10−5 ≤r≤10−3, ifr≥10−3.
We can build a function as above by smoothing out h(r) = min{r, 10−4 + (1 − ǫ)(r − 10−4)}. Note these two linear functions intersect at r = 10−4 . Observe that any such function satisfies |h′ | ≤ 1 on (0, +∞) as h′′ ≤ 0, and so we can compute
Ricrr ≥0,
Ricaa = 2 >0,
 δ2
Ricii ≥ 0 . (54)
In particular, this metric has nonnegative Ricci curvature. The S 1 × S 1 torus Hopf action on S 3 × S 3 induces an isometric action with respect to g from our warping coordinates. On the domain {r ≥ 10−3} we can write this metric
dr2 +δ2gS3 +􏰁10−4 +(1−ǫ)(r−10−4)􏰂2gS3 . (55) If we consider the domain U = {r ≤ 10−2 − 10−4} then we see that B \ U is isometric to the annulus
S3×A10−2,∞⊆S3×C(S3 ),asclaimed. 􏰞 δ δ 1−ǫ
6. EQUIVARIANT MAPPING CLASS GROUP AND RICCI CURVATURE Recall that we have equipped S 3 × S 3 with the left (a, b)-Hopf action given by
θ·(a,b) (s1,s2)=(aθ·s1,bθ·s2), θ∈S1, (56)
w h e r e θ · s i s t h e c l a s s i c a l ( l e f t ) H o p f a c t i o n o n S 3 . We w i l l c o n s i d e r i n t h i s S e c t i o n S 3 × S 3 w i t h t h e s t a n d a r d metric gS 3 ×S 3 and the distinct (1, k) and (1, 0) actions. Our goal is to connect these two spaces by a family of smooth S 1-invariant Riemannian manifolds (S 3 × S 3, gt) with positive Ricci curvature which begin and end with the standard geometry but with these distinct actions. The subtle point is that while g1 is isometric to g0, necessarily it cannot be equal to the standard metric as a tensor and we will have g1 = φ∗gS 3×S 3 for some mapping class nontrivial diffeomorphism φ. The precise statement is the following, which is the main goal of this Section:

26 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Theorem 6.1 (Equivariant Mapping Class and Ricci). Let g0 = gS 3×S 3 be the standard metric on S 3 × S 3, andletk∈Z.Thenthereexistadiffeomorphismφ:S3×S3 →S3×S3 andafamilyofmetrics(S3×S3,gt) so that
(1) Rict >0forallt∈[0,1]
(2) The S 1-action ·(1,k) on S 3 × S 3 is an isometric action for all gt. (3) g1 = φ∗g0 with φ􏰁θ ·(1,k) (s1, s2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φ(s1, s2) .
Remark 6.1. We will show in Section 6.9 that in the case k = 1 we can pick φ = φ1 to be the diffeomorphism specified in the Examples of Section 6.1.
Remark 6.2. The above Theorem is for the (1, k)-actions induced by the left Hopf actions. Of course, one can equally well deal with the right actions or mapping (k, 1)-actions to (0, 1)-actions.
The proof will be divided into various steps. In Section 6.2 we will begin by studying the geometry of N ≡ S 1\S 3 × S 3, that is the quotient of S 3 × S 3 by the (1, k)-Hopf action. We will see that we can view N itself as a Riemannian S 3-principal bundle over S 2, so that we have the viewpoint
33S1S32
S ×S −→N−→S . (57)
Each of these bundle structures are Riemannian submersions, however the connections will be nonstandard 3 S3232
and the S fibers will not have the standard geometry. In particular, N −→ S is an S bundle over S with twisted connection and totally geodesic fibers. We notice that the induced metric on the fibers will be right invariant but not biinvariant.
Our construction will now proceed as follows. In the first step of the construction in Section 6.3 we will construct a family (Nt, ht) = S 1\(S 3 × S 3, gt) with positive Ricci which begins at N0 ≡ N as above, and ends at N1/2. Each Nt will itself be the total space of a Riemannian S 3-principal bundle over S 2, where for t ∈ [0, 1/2] the connection will be fixed but the geometry of the S 3 fibers will round off so that N1/2 will become an S 3 bundle over S 2 with small but round S 3 fibers. This construction will essentially take place directly on (S 3 × S 3, gt), however it will be crucial in the remaining steps that we emphasize the geometry of Nt during this process.
The second and third steps of the construction will focus on just changing the geometry of (Nt,ht). For each t ∈ [1/2,3/4] we will have in Section 6.4 that Nt is a Riemannian S3-principal bundle with totally geodesic fibers which are isometric to spheres. The connection of this bundle on N1/2 is highly nontriv- ial, and in the second step we will vary this connection until we arrive at a flat connection on N3/4. The sphere fibers may shrink during this process in order to preserve the positive Ricci condition. It is worth emphasizing that although the connection at the end is flat, it will look highly nontrivial in the original coor- dinates of N = S 1\S 3 × S 3. In the third step of Section 6.5, where we now have a flat connection with small round sphere fibers, we will increase the size of the sphere fiber until we arrive at N1 = S 2 × S 3 isometrically.
The last steps of the construction will view S 3 × S 3 as the total space of a Riemannian S 1 -principal bundle over Nt. This S1 bundle structure will generate our family of actions, and in particular by definition will

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 27
beginwiththe(1,k)actiononS3×S3. Ametricgt onthistotalspaceisthenwelldefinedbyanS1-principal connection ηt and fiber size functions ft : Nt → R, see Section 4.1. We will choose ηt to be a Yang-Mills connection under the Coulumb gauge, which will allow us to show Rict ≥ 0. In Step 5 of Section 6.7 we will further vary the fiber size ft of the circle bundle so that we can push the Ricci curvature up to become strictly positive. Recall the construction of Nt ends with N1 = S 2 × S 3 isometrically. Thus we will see that the Yang-mills connection must give us a total space which is isometric to S 3 × S 3 with the bundle action being the (1, 0) action. In Section 6.8 we will put all of these ingredients together in order to complete the proof of Theorem 6.1.
6.1. Examples: Equivariant Mappings φk : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3. In this subsection let us first present some explicit examples of equivariant mappings which satisfy:
φk􏰁θ ·(1,k) (s1, s2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φk(s1, s2) . (58) We will see in Theorem 6.1 that we will be able to take these explicit mappings as our end diffeomor-
phisms.
6.1.1. TheCasek=1. Letustreatk=1andk>1separately. Inthecaseofk=1wewillvieweachS3 as the corresponding Lie Group SU(2) and so write (s1, s2) ∈ S 3 × S 3. Let us explicitly define the mapping
φ1(s1, s2) = (s1, s−1 s2) . (59) 1
It follows that the left (1, 1)-action pushes forward to the left (1, 0) action, that is φ1􏰁θ ·(1,1) (s1, s2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φ1(s1, s2) .
6.1.2. The Case k > 1. The case k > 1 is a little trickier. Let u,z ∈ S3. We write u = (u1,u2), z = (z1,z2), where u1, u2, z1, z2 ∈ C. The diffeomorphism is given by
􏰁􏰂􏰊1kk􏰋 φk u1, u2, z1, z2 ≡ u1, u2, 􏰝|u1|2k + |u2|2k (u ̄1, −u2) · (z1, z2)
􏰊1kkkk􏰋
= u1, u2, 􏰝|u1|2k + |u2|2k (u ̄1z1 + u2z ̄2, −u2z ̄1 + u ̄1z2) . (60)
where · denotes the product of S 3 as Lie-group.
With this choice, we have the claimed equivariance property that
φk􏰁θ ·(1,k) (u1, u2, z1, z2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φk(u1, u2, z1, z2) . (61) Moreover, φk is equivariant with respect to the S 3 -action on the second S 3 -factor, i.e.
φk(u,z·g)=φk(u,z)·g, foreveryg∈S3. (62) Note this corresponds to the previous construction when k = 1.
    
28 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
6.2. The Geometry of N ≡ S1\S3 × S3. Let us begin with S3 × S3 endowed with the product Lie group structure. Let U1, U2, U3 be an orthonormal basis of right invariant vector fields on the first S 3 factor, and similarly let V1, V2, V3 be an orthonormal basis of right invariant vector fields on the second S 3 factor. Let U1 and V1 be the right invariant vector fields induced from the left Hopf actions. We will write U∗j and V∗j to denote the dual basis of one forms.
Let us now define (N,h) ≡ S1\S3 × S3 to be the isometric quotient of S3 × S3 by the left (1,k)-Hopf action, which is a free and isometric action. We have that π(1,k) : S 3 × S 3 → N is a principal S 1-bundle, and it is endowed with the Yang-Mills principal connection
η0:= 1 􏰊U1∗+kV1∗􏰋. (63) 1+k2
We shall denote the projection π(1,k)(s1, s2) ∈ N as [s1, s2], where (s1, s2) ∈ S 3 × S 3. Note that the right S 3 action on the second factor of S 3 × S 3 commutes with the left (1, k) action. The quotient action on N:
(64) . Note
(65)
 [s1,s2]·s=[s1,s2·s], s∈S3, [s1,s2]∈N, S3232
is a free and isometric action, and thus π : N −→ S admits a structure of principal S -bundle over S that
π([s1, s2]) = πHopf (s1) , is the same as the Hopf projection on the first factor.
3S121 Remark 6.3. We can understand N in the following manner. Begin with S −→ S , viewed as an S -
principal bundle over S 2 with respect to the left Hopf action. Consider the homomorphism ρ : S 1 → S 3, ρ(z) = z−k where z ∈ S 1 is identified with a complex number and z−k ∈ S 3 with a unit quaternion. Then we can identify N as the associated S 3 bundle over S 2 under this representation. This point of view is particu- larly convenient for writing coordinate expressions of the above.
Our first claim is about the isomorphism class of the principal S 3-bundle π : N → S 2.
Lemma 6.2. The principal S 3-bundle π : N → S 2 is isomorphic to the trivial bundle S 2 × S 3.
Proof. It is a classical fact that the isomorphism classes of principal G-bundles over spheres Sn are in bijection with πn−1(G), where G is any connected Lie group. See for instance [St, Chapter 18]. As n = 2, and G = S 3 is simply connected, we infer that any principal S 3-bundle over S 2 is isomorphic to the trivial one. 􏰞
Remark 6.4. It was already noted in [PT, Example 4.1] that N is diffeomorphic to S 2 × S 3, with an argu- ment based on the classification of simply connected 5-manifolds, see also [WZ]. The principal S 3-bundle structure of N plays a key role for our purposes.

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 29
6.2.1. Geometry on N. Our next goal is to understand the metric h on N.
Begin by observing that if we endow the base space S 2 with 1 gS 2 , the round metric of radius 1 , then
  42
π : (N, h) → S 2 is a Riemannian submersion. To see this let us write S 2 = N/S 3 = S 1\S 3 × S 3/S 3. If we
1/2
quotient by the S 3 action first then we have S 2 = S 1\S 3, where the (1, k) action descends to the (1, 0) action
on S 3 as we have quotiented out the second factor. Thus the quotient space is the usual Hopf quotient, which is the sphere of radius 1 .
 2
Notice that over (S 3 × S 3, g0) we have the orthonormal basis
√ 1 (U1 +kV1), U2, U3, √ 1 (−kU1 +V1), V2, V3 , (66) 1 + k2 1 + k2
where as before U1, U2, U3 are the right invariant vector fields in the first S 3 factor, and V1, V2, V3 are the right invariant vector fields in the second S 3 factor. The first vector field is vertical with respect to the (1, k)- projection map π(1,k) : (S 3 × S 3, g0) → (N, h), while the last five vector fields are horizontal.
The following claims are almost immediate:
    (1) dπ(1,k)[V2], dπ(1,k)[V3], dπ(1,k)􏰙 √
(2) dπ(1,k)[U2], dπ(1,k)[U3] span the horizontal directions in N.
1 (−kU1 + V1)􏰚 span the vertical directions in N. 1+k2
  In order to check (1), it is enough to observe that the three vectors span a three-dimensional subspace of the tangent of N, and belong to the kernel of dπ since π ◦ π(1,k)(g1, g2) = πHopf (g1), by definition.
Claim (2) follows immediately since the span of the vectors in (2) is two-dimensional and orthogonal to the span of the vectors in (1). The orthogonality follows from the fact that (66) is an orthonormal frame: h(dπ(1,k)[U2], dπ(1,k)[V2]) = g0(U2, V2) = 0, and similarly for the other vectors.
6.3. Step 1: Squishing the Fibers. By looking at the last three vector fields in (66) we see that the metric on the S 3 fibers of N is right invariant, but not left invariant. We do see that it is invariant under the left S 1 action, the action of which just rotates the V2, V3 plane. Our first step of the construction will be to round off the metric so that the fibers become bi-invariant round spheres. We will work directly to build a family of metrics(S3 ×S3,gt)fort∈[0,1/2]whichcontinuetobeinvariantbytheleftS1 ×S1 Hopfaction,andin- variant by the right S 3 action. In particular, for each such t we can define (Nt, ht) = (N, ht) ≡ S 1\(S 3 ×S 3, gt) where we have quotiented out by the (1, k)-Hopf action. As there are many properties of this family that we will need in the sequel, let us summarize the end results of our constructions for this step:
Lemma 6.3. For t ∈ [0,1/2] there exists smooth families (S3 × S3,gt), (N,ht) ≡ S1\(S3 × S3,gt) which satisfy Richt , Ricgt > 0 and such that:
S32213
(i) π : (N, ht ) −→ S 1/2 = (S , 4 gS2 ) is a Riemannian S -principal bundle with totally geodesic fibers.
Further the S 3 fibers in N1/2 are bi-invariant spheres;
 
30 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
(ii) π(1,k) : (S 3 × S 3, gt) → (Nt, ht) is a Riemannian S 1-principal bundle with total geodesic fibers and constant connection ηt = η0. Further, the connections ηt are Yang-Mills and in Coulomb Gauge.
Remark 6.5. We will also take our construction so that gt,ht are constant metrics near t = 0, 1. 2
G
Remark 6.6. Recall that we call a principal G-bundle P −→ B a Riemannian G-principal bundle if P is
equipped with a metric gP which is invariant under the right G action. Recall such a metric defines a principal connection ξ and a family over B of right invariant metrics on G.
 To define our family of metrics on S 3 × S 3 will have as a global orthonormal basis the vector fields Tt≡1(U1+kV1), X2≡U2, X3≡U3,
ft
W 1t ≡ 1 ( − k U 1 + V 1 ) , W 2t ≡ 1 V 2 , W 3t ≡ 1 V 3 . at atbt atbt
( 6 7 )
    Let us begin with some remarks on this basis. Observe that U1 + kV1 is the direction associated to the (1,k)-action, and so T is the unit direction associated to the (1,k) action. In particular, we have the S1- fibers have length 2π ft, and in order for the geometry at t = 0 to be the standard geometry we will choose
ft = √1+k2,at = √1+k2 andbt = √
The vector fields X2, X3 represent the horizontal directions associated to the base S 2. As the geometry is
  1 for t near zero. 1+k2
  symmetric with respect to the X2, X3 and W2t , W3t indices we have that the left S 1 × S 1 actions are isometric actions. As X2, X3 are time independent we have that Nt/S 3 = S 2 remains a sphere of radius 1/2.
1/2
The directions W1t , W2t , W3t represent the directions horizontal with respect to the S 1 action, but will in-
duce vertical vector fields on N with respect to the right S 3 action. The orbit of the (k, 1) action in the torus
1 dense, and hence the geometry of the S 3 fibers of the Riemannian S 3-bundle 1 1+k2
generated by {Tt,Wt} is √
S3 2 1+k2 1 1
  Nt −→ S1/2 can be seen to be determined by the right invariant orthonormal basis { at V1, atbt V2, atbt V3}. We will therefore choose our warping function bt = b(t) as any smooth function such that
    1  √
if t is near 0 , b(t)=b ̇ ≥0 ift∈[0,1/2],
  2
if t is near 1/2.
We will choose at to be nonincreasing shortly. This will play the role of squishing additional positive
curvature into the system to compensate for the movement of bt.
Let us now study some properties about our ansatz. We begin by computing the nonzero brackets of our vector fields. These computations all boil down to using that Uj,Vj are a standard right invariant basis for
 1+k t

1 1+k2
 
S3:
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE
31
[Tt,X2]=2X3, [X3,Tt]=2X2, [X2,X3]= 2ft Tt− 2kat W1t, ft ft 1 + k2 1 + k2
    [Tt,W2t] = 2kX3 , [W3t,Tt] = 2kW2t , ft ft
  [W1t,W2t] = 2 W3t , [W3t,W1t] = 2 W2t , [W2t,W3t] =
2kft
(1 + k2)a2t b2t
Tt + 2
(1 + k2)atb2t
W1t ,
There are several takeaways from the above computations. In order to have an ease in the formulas, let
    [W1t,X2] = −2kX3 , at
[X3,W1t] = −2kX2 . at
(68) = X3. Observe that the structural and
(69)
at
at
  us be abusive in notation and define WTt Christofell coefficients
= Tt, WXt = X2 and WXt 23
cijk ≡gt([Wit,Wtj],Wkt), Γijk ≡gt(∇WitWtj,Wkt),
are constants and related by Γi jk = 1 􏰁ci jk + cki j − c jki 􏰂. As a first observation note that to be nonvanishing all 2
three of the indices must be distinct, and in particular we can conclude that ∇ W tj W tj = 0 ,
gt(∇Wkt Wtj,Wkt) = 0. (70) To put this into perspective, the first equation will tell us shortly that all the bundles of interest have totally
 geodesic fibers, and the second equation will tell us that our S 1-connections are Yang-Mills. 133S1 13
6.3.1. The S -Principal Bundle S × S −→ Nt. Thus let us consider now the S -principal bundle S × 3S1t1
S −→ N. It follows from (70) that ∇TtT = 0, and hence the S -fibers of this principal bundle are totally geodesic. It follows from (67) that the connection 1-form of this bundle is given by the metric dual
ηt = ft−1gt(Tt,·). (71) Note that as Wtj ∝ W0j we have that ηt = η0 is independent of t as a 1-form. We can compute the curvature
form ωt = dηt of this bundle by
ωt(Wtj,Wkt)= 1 􏰁⟨∇WtT,Wkt⟩−⟨∇WtT,Wtj⟩􏰂= ckjT ,
2ft j k ft
so that we can use (68) to write
ωt =− 2 􏰁X∗ ⊗X∗ −X∗ ⊗X∗􏰂− 2k 􏰁Wt,∗ ⊗Wt,∗ −Wt,∗ ⊗Wt,∗􏰂. (73) 1+k2 2 3 3 2 (1+k2)a2b2 2 3 3 2
(72)
    Consequently, it follows from (70) that
divNtηt =0, divNtωt =0,
(74)
tt

32 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
and hence ηt is a Yang-Mills connection in Coulomb gauge.
LetusnowcomputetheRiccicurvatureRicgt of(S3×S3,gt)intermsoftheRiccicurvatureofNt.We will compute RicNt shortly after. Let us use H ∈ span{X2, X3, Wtj} to denote any unit horizontal vector with respect to the S 1 action. Using Proposition 4.4 we have that
tt12 ft2 Ricgt(T,T)=4|ωt|t ≥c(k)a2,
t Ricgt(Tt,H) = −divNtωt(H) = 0,
f2
Ricgt (H, H) = Richt (H, H) − t |ωt[H]|2
≥Richt(H,H)−c(k)a2 , (75) t
where we have used that bt is bounded above and below by functions of k. Our main takeaway is that if Richt > 0 then for ft ≤ ft(ht, at) we have that the Ricci curvature of (S 3 × S 3, gt) is itself positive.
6.3.2. The Geometry of Nt . We understand that the right S 3 action on Nt is an isometric action which gives Nt the structure of a Riemannian S 3-principal bundle
S32
Nt −→S1/2. (76)
Let us see that the S 3 fibers of this bundle are totally geodesic. Indeed, on S 3 × S 3 we know that W1t , W2t , W3t span the horizontal subspace induced the S 3 action downstairs. On the other hand, we know by (70) that ∇W tj W tj = 0. One can compute directly from this that the S 3 fibers are totally geodesic, but let us also explain it geometrically. As ∇W tj W tj = 0, it follows that the orbits of W tj are horizontal geodesics in S 3 × S 3 and thus project to geodesics in Nt which are tangent to the S 3 fibers. As they span the tangent of the S 3 fibers at each point, we see that the fibers are totally geodesic.
To study the Ricci curvature of Nt let us first study the geometry of the S 3 fibers. We again observe from (67) that the geometry of the S 3 fibers are right invariant and invariant under the left S 1 action. Thus we see that geometrically the fibers are a Hopf bundle
   2
ft2
 with fibers of length of the fibers satisfy
3S12
S −→Satbt/2,
at and the standard Hopf connection. In particular, for b ≥ 1 1+k2 t 1+k2
RicF ≥ c(k) . a2t
(77) the Ricci curvature
(78)
   Let us compute the Ricci curvature on Nt. Recall that the vector fields H ∈ span{X2, X3, W1t , W2t , W3t } in S 3 × S 3 horizontally span the tangent space of Nt . Though they do not well define vector fields on Nt (one needs to lift a point [s1,s2] ∈ Nt to (s1,s2) ∈ S3 ×S3 for such an association), the value of RicNt(H,H) is
1 S32 independent of the lift. Now let ξt ∈ Ω (Nt ; su(2)) be the connection one form for the bundle Nt −→ S 1/2

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 33
with Ωt = dξt + 1 [ξt ∧ ξt ] the curvature form. Using Proposition 4.1 we have that the Ricci curvature of Nt 2
 can be estimated
RicNt(Wit,Wit) ≥c(k)􏰊1 −a2t|Ωt|2􏰋, a2t
|RicNt(Wit,Xj)| ≤ c(k)at|divΩt|2 , RicNt(Xj,Xj) =4−c(k)a2t|Ωt[Xj]|2.
 (79) It follows that if at ≤ at (k, ξt ) is sufficiently small then RicNt > 2. This finishes Step 1 of the construction.
􏰞
6.4. Step 2: Trivializing the connection on (Nt,ht). In the second and third steps of our construction we
focus on (Nt,ht). In this second step we change smoothly the principal connection until we get to the flat
one, which exists in view of Lemma 6.2. Along the process, we keep fixed the metric on the base space
(S 2, 1 gS 2 ), and we squish the metric on the fibers by a factor λ(t), depending smoothly in time. The latter is 4
 needed to keep the Ricci curvature positive along the way. In the third step we can increase the fiber size to arrive at N1 = S 2 × S 3 isometrically. Precisely, the next two steps will accomplish the following:
1/2 1
Lemma 6.4. There exists a smooth family (N, ht ) for t ∈ [1/2, 1] of Riemannian metrics on Nt with Richt > 0,
constant in a neighborhood of the end points, verifying the following properties: S32332
i) Nt −→ S 1/2 is a Riemannian S -principal bundle with totally geodesic fibers isometric to (S , λt gS 3 ) ii) The S 3-connection ηt on Nt is flat for t ∈ [3/4, 1] ,
iii) N1 isisometricto(S2 ×S3,1gS2 +gS3). 4
 S λ3
a1/2 3 1/2 2
Let λ1/2 ≡ 1+k2 be the size of the S fibers of N1/2, as in the previous section. Recall that N1/2 −→ S 1/2
 has the structure of a Riemannian S 3-principal bundle whose metric is well defined by a principal connec-
tion ξ1/2 ∈ Ω1(N; su(2)), the base metric S 2 , and the binvariant fiber metric S 3 . 1/2 λ1/2
For all t ∈ [1/2, 1] we will construct a (smoothly varying) family ξt ∈ Ω1(N; su(2)) and λt such that Nt is the induced Riemannian S 3-principal bundle
Nt −→S1/2. (80)
Let us first build the family of connections. By Lemma 6.2, there exists a smooth S3-equivariant map Φ : N → S2 × S3, where we view S2 × S3 as the trivial principal S3-bundle over S2. The flat principal connection on S 2 × S 3 can be identified with the Maurer-Cartan form ξMC of S 3. Note that Φ∗ξMC is then a flat connection on N → S 2, though clearly its coordinate expression does not mesh well with the earlier constructions. We define ξt as the family of connections which come from an affine combination:
ξt =􏰁1−α(t)􏰂Φ∗ξMC+α(t)ξ1/2, (81)
S3
λt 2

34 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
where α(t) ≥ 0 is a nonincreasing smooth function with α ≡ 1 for t near 1/2 and α ≡ 0 for t near 3 . We can 4
then define the metric ht explicitly as by Vilms [Vi]:
ht(X,Y) := 1gS2(π∗[X],π∗[Y])+λ2t gS3(ξt[X],ξt[Y]), (82)
4
where we will specify the smooth function λ(t) : [ 1 , 1] → R+ momentarily. Let us denote Ωt = dξi + 1 [ξt ∧ξt ] 22
the curvature of our connection. Let X denote a unit horizontal direction with respect to the S 2 base, and 1/2
let W denote a unit vertical direction with respect to the S 3 action. Then using Proposition 4.1 we can compute the Ricci curvature of this metric as
R i c h t [ W , W ] = 2 + λ 2t | Ω t | 2 , λ2t 4
Richt [W, X] = λtdivS 2 Ωt[X] ,
Richt [X, X] = 4 − λ2t |Ωt[X]|2 . (83)
It follows for λt ≤ λt(Ωt) that Richt > 1 is uniformly positive for t ∈ [1/2,3/4].
6.5. Step 3: Trivializing the Geometry. For t = 3/4 we now have that Ω3/4 = 0 vanishes. In particular
we have isometrically that
N3/4 ≡S2 ×S3 . (84) 1/2 λ3/4
It follows that over the range t ∈ [3/4, 1] we may increase λt until λt ≡ 1 for t in a neighborhood of 1, at which point we have that N1 ≡ S 2 × S 3, finishing the proof of Lemma 6.4. 􏰞
1/2 1
6.6. Step4:Constructing(S3×S3,gt)withRicgt ≥0. Wehavenowbuiltafamilyofgeometries(N,ht) with Richt > 0 which begin at N0 = S1\(S3 × S3,g0) and end at N1 = S2 × S3 isometrically. Further, we have explicitly built for t ∈ [0, 1/2] a family of metrics (S 3 × S 3 , gt ) which are Riemannian S 1 -principal bundles over (Nt,ht) with totally geodesic fibers of constant length 2πft. The S1-connections ηt of these bundles are both Yang-Mills and in Coulomb gauge. That is, the curvature form ωt = dηt and ηt both have vanishing horizontal divergence on S 3 × S 3 . For ωt this is equivalent to asking that the curvature 2-form on Nt be divergence free, which is itself equivalent to asking that ωt be Hodge harmonic.
In the next Step our goal is to extend this construction to a smoothly varying family of Riemannian met- rics gt for t ∈ [1/2, 1] with nonnegative Ricci curvature. The metrics (S 3 × S 3, gt) will also be Riemannian S 1-principal bundles over Nt with respect to connections ηt and with totally geodesic S 1 fibers of constant length ft. In this Step of the construction we will choose the connections ηt uniquely so that they are Yang- Mills and in Coulomb Gauge. We will see this is sufficient to force Ricgt ≥ 0. In the next Step we will allow the warping function ft to not be constant and vary as a function of Nt in order to push the Ricci curvature to become positive.
Now let [ωt] = [ω0] ∈ H2(Nt) be the cohomology class associated to the (1, k)-circle bundle S 3×S 3 → Nt. Note that H2(Nt) = Z as we already understand from Lemma 6.2 that Nt is diffeomorphic to S 2 × S 3, and that [ωt] is the generating class of this cohomology. We can view [ωt] as the deRham cohomology class
      
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 35
generated by the curvature of any connection of this bundle.
For each t ∈ [0, 1] let ωt be the unique representative of [ω0 ] which is divergence free with respect to the geometry of Nt. That is, let ωt be the unique Hodge-harmonic representative. As this class is unique it fol- lows that for t ∈ [0, 1/2] this choice agrees with our original construction of the curvature, and it smoothly extends this choice to all t ∈ [0,1]. Thanks to the invariance of ht by the right action of S3 on Nt, we automatically have that ωt is also invariant by the right action of S 3 on Nt .
Now for each such ωt there is a connection [ηt] ∈ Ω1(S3 × S3) whose curvature d[ηt] = π∗ωt is equal to our enforced curvature choice for our (1, k)-bundle. We write [ηt ] to represent that the connection is not uniquely defined by this condition. It is only well defined up to the addition of dρt where ρt is a S 1-invariant function on S3 × S3. That is, ρt is a function on Nt. In order to pick a unique ηt ∈ [ηt] from this class we will ask that it minimizes
ηt = arg min 􏰗 |ζt|2t . (85) ζt∈[ηt] S 3×S 3
It is classical that this minimization exists, and indeed there is a unique solution. The Euler-Lagrange equation for this minimization is given by the Coulomb gauge condition
divNtηt = divgtηt = 0. (86)
A Riemannian metric (S 3 × S 3, gt) is now well defined by the metrics (N, ht), the family of connections ηt, and the fiber size ft ∈ R of the circle fibers. If we let T represent a unit vertical direction with respect to the S 1 action and H a unit horizontal direction, then we can compute the Ricci curvature
f2 Ricgt(T,T)= t |ωt|2,
4
Ricgt (T, H) = divNt ωt[H] = 0 ,
f2
Ricgt (H, H) = Richt [H, H] − t |ωt[H]|2 . (87)
2
Let us now make some observations on the above computations. Recall that for t near 1 we have that
Nt ≡ S2 × S3. For quantitative sake let us say this holds for t ≥ t0 with t0 < 1. Recall that for all t we have
Richt > 0, and so in particular for t ≤ t0 we see that if ft ≤ ft(ht,ωt) then Ricgt ≥ 0 and Ricgt(H,H) > τ
forsomeτ>0. Fort≥t0,whereNt ≡S2 ×S3,weseethatωt ispreciselythevolumeformontheS2 1/2 1
factor, as this is the unique Hodge-harmonic representative of the cohomology class generated by S 2. We further have that ηt is the canonical Hopf connection on the first S 3 factor, as it is the unique Coulumb gauge connection representing this curvature. In particular, in the range t ∈ [t0 , 1] we can increase ft until ft ≡ 1 fortnear1.Wethengetthatg1 ≡S13×S13.
Observe however that while g1 is isometrically equivalent to S 13 × S 13, the S 1 action coming from the S 1-principal bundle structure S 3 × S 3 → N1 is now precisely the (1, 0) action, as our S 1 bundle was the one coming from the Hopf fiber of the first factor. We have therefore nearly completed the proof of Theorem 6.1.
  
36 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
6.7. Step 5: Constructing (S 3 × S 3 , gt ) with Ricgt > 0. We have at this stage built a family of metrics (S3 ×S3,gt) with isometric S1 actions which begin and end isometrically at S13 ×S13 with the (1,k) and (1,0) actions, respectively. Further, these metrics all satisfy Ricgt ≥ 0.
We have not yet completed the proof however. It follows from (87) that we can choose ft sufficiently small that
Ricgt[H,H] > τ > 0, (88) is uniformly positive for all t ∈ [1/2,1]. However, if we have |ωt|2 = 0 at some point, then Ricgt(T,T) =
ft2 2
4 |ωt| = 0 at this point. Were this to occur, then we would only have Ricgt ≥ 0, and it will be important in
the applications that we get strict positivity.
In order to handle this, we will perturb our S 1 warping functions ft . Currently ft is spatially constant, and our perturbation will be by a small function of Nt, cf. with [GPT]. Let us write our new warping function as
 f ̃ = f + ǫ h , tttt
(89)
where ht : N → R will be a smoothly varying collection of smooth functions which vanish for t near 1 and 2
1, and ǫt will be sufficiently small constants depending smoothly on time.
In order to pick ht : Nt → R let us begin with several observations. First as (N, ht ) is invariant under the
right S 3 action, we have that |ωt |2 is invariant under this right action as well. In particular, we can view |ωt |2
as a function of N/S 3 = S 2 . We will similarly choose ht to be an S 3 invariant function, which is to say a 1/2
function of S 2.
As a second observation, let us point out that ωt is non-trivial in cohomology, hence cannot be flat and so
we have
 􏰢N for some c0 > 0.
|ωt|2 ≥ c0 , for every t ∈ [0,1], (90) Let us now consider a smooth cutoff function φ : R → [−1, 0] with φ(s) = −1 if s ≤ 10−2c0 and φ(s) = 0
ifs≥10−1c0.Letusdefineht :S2 →Rasthesolutiono􏰢f
∆S2ht ≡φ(|ωt|2)−
If we take 􏰡 ht = 0 then ht is uniquely defined, smooth, and smoothly varying in t. As a first observation note that if |ωt|2 > 10−1c0 on N, then we have that ∆ht ≡ 0 identically vanishes. Let us also see that ∆ht is uniformly negative when |ωt| is small. To begin, as everything is smooth let us define M so that
|∇ht| + |∇2ht| + |ωt| + |∇ωt| ≤ M , (92)
S2
φ(|ωt|2). (91)

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 37
uniformly for all t ∈ [1/2, 1] . Using (90) we have that there exists at least one point with |ωt |2 ( p) ≥ c0 , and so by (92) we have that |ω |2 > 10−1c 􏰢and hence φ(|ω |2) = 0 on B 2 −1 (p). Consequently, we have that
t 0 t c0(20M ) φ(|ωt|2) > −1 + c20(20M2)−2 .
(93)
We will use Proposition 4.4 to compute the Ricci curvature on (S 3 × S 3, gt). Let T be a unit direction in the S 1 fiber direction and let H represent any unit direction perpendicular to T . Let us split our computation into two regions. If we are on the region {|ωt|2 > 10−2c0} then we can estimate
It follows that if x ∈ {|ωt|2 < 10−2c0} then
Now let f ̃ = f + ǫ h be our warping function and to begin let ǫ < (2M)−1 f , so that 1 f < | f ̃| < 2 f . We
∆ht(x) < −c20(20M2)−2 .
(94)
tttt tt2ttt
will further decrease ǫt later. Recall that we previously chose ft small enough in Step 4, in order to guarantee Ricgt ≥ 0 and Ricgt > τ > 0 in the horizontal directions when we set ǫt = 0.
 Ric(T,T)≥ ft2c0 −ǫt , 400 ft
|Ric(T, H)| ≤ 3 M2ǫt , 2
Ric(H,H) ≥ Richt(H,H)−
Here we used that Laplacians and Hessians of S3-invariant functions on N can be identified with the corresponding objects in the base space S2, since the S3 fibers are totally geodesic. Then we can choose
ft < ft(ht) and ǫt < ǫt( ft, M, c0, |Ric|ht ) and obtain Ricgt > 0 in the region {|ωt|2 > 10−2c0}.
On the other hand, let us consider the region {|ωt|2 < 10−2c0}, then we can use (94) to estimate
ǫ t c 20 ( 2 0 M 2 ) − 2 Ric(T,T)≥ 2f,
   t |Ric(T, H)| ≤ 3 M2ǫt ,
2
Ric(H,H) ≥ Richt(H,H)−
f2 4Mǫ
t M2 − t . (96)
f2 4Mǫ
t M2 − t . (95)
2 ft
      2 ft
It is the estimate of the first term which has changed. If we now further assume ft < ft(ht) and ǫt <
ǫt ( ft , M, c0 , |Ric|ht ), then we can again conclude that Ricgt > 0.
6.8. Finishing the Proof of Theorem 6.1. We have essentially finished the proof of Theorem 6.1 at this
stage, however let us put all the ingredients together to see that this is the case.
We already noticed that there is an S3-equivariant isometry Φ : (N,h1) → (S2 × S3, 1gS2 + gS3) with 4
respect to the respective right S 3 actions. Moreover, consider the S 1 bundles π(1,k) : S 3 × S 3 → N and π(1,0) : S 3 × S 3 → S 2 × S 3. Then the S 1 bundles π(1,k) : S 3 × S 3 → N and Φ∗π(1,0) : S 3 × S 3 → N are
 
38 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
necessarily isomorphic as S 1 bundles over N as they arise from the same cohomology class. That is, we can find an S 1-equivariant diffeomorphism
Φˆ : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3 , ( 9 7 ) with Φˆ (θ ·(1,k) (s1, s2)) = θ ·(1,0) Φˆ (s1, s2) whose induced mapping on the quotients is given by the isometry
Φ:(N,h1)→S2 ×S3. 1/2 1
We claim that, up to composition with a gauge transformation, Φˆ is an S 1-equivariant isometry between (S3 ×S3,g1)withthe(1,k)-Hopfaction,and(S3 ×S3,gS3 +gS3)withthe(1,0)-Hopfaction.
Begin by observing that as the induced quotient map Φ is an isometry, if we denote by η1 and ηc the S 1-principal connections of π(1,k) : S 3 × S 3 → N1 and π(1,0) : S 3 × S 3 → S 2 × S 3 respectively, it holds
d 􏰊 Φˆ ∗ η c 􏰋 = d η 1 , ( 9 8 )
since both connections are Yang-Mills, and the curvature form being Hodge-harmonic is a uniquely defined condition in its cohomology class. As S 3 × S 3 has trivial first cohomology, there exists a smooth function φ : S 3 × S 3 → R such that
Φˆ ∗ η c = η 1 + d φ , ( 9 9 )
and by right invariance we can assume that φ = φ′ ◦ π(1,k) for some smooth function φ′ : N → R. In particular, and with a slight abuse of notation, after composing with the gauge transformation induced by φ′ we can assume that
Φˆ ∗ η c = η 1 . ( 1 0 0 )
Therefore, Φˆ is an S 1-equivariant diffeomorphism between principal S 1-bundles with totally geodesic and isometric S 1-fibers, it induces and isometry between the base spaces and maps one connection form to the other. Hence it is an S 1-equivariant isometry, and this finishes the proof of Theorem 6.1. 􏰞
6.9. Explicit Diffeomorphism for k = 1. Let us end by addressing Remark 6.1 and show that for k = 1 we can explicitly choose the diffeomorphism φ in Theorem 6.1 by φ = φ1 from Example 6.1.
Our first observation is that φ1, besides pushing forward the (1,1)-action to the (1,0)-action is also equivariant with respect to the right S 3 -action. Hence it induces an S 3 -principal bundles isomorphism Φ1 : N → S 2 × S 3. It turns out that there is an explicit expression for Φ1, namely
Φ1([s1,s2])=(πHopf(s1),s−1 ·s2). (101) 1
ByusingΦ1 inplaceofΦinStep2,andarguingasSection6.8,wegetanisometryΦˆ1 :(S3×S3,g0)→ (S 3 × S 3, g1) which coincides with φ1 up to gauge transformation. In particular, Φˆ 1 and φ1 are isotopic.

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 39
7. STEP 2: EQUIVARIANT TWISTING
Our main goal in this Section is to prove Proposition 3.3, which is Step 2 of the construction, which we restate for the convenience of the reader:
Proposition 7.1 (Step 2: Twisting the Action). Let 1 > ǫ, ǫˆ, δ > 0 with k ∈ Z. Then there exist δˆ(ǫ, ǫˆ, δ, k) > 0 with R(ǫ, ǫˆ, δ, k) > 1 and a metric space X with an isometric and free S 1 action such that
(1) XissmoothawayfromasinglethreesphereSδ3×{p}∈XwithRicX ≥0.
(2) There exists B10−3(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B10−1(p) ⊆ X which is isometric to S3 × B10−2(0) ⊆ S3 ×C(S3 ) , and
δ δ1−ǫ under this isometry the S 1 action on U identifies with the (1, k)-Hopf action.
(3) ThereexistsB10−1R(p)⊆Uˆ ⊆B10R(p)⊆Xs.t.X\Uˆ isisometrictoS3 ×AR,∞(0)⊆S3 ×C(S3 ), 1 ˆ δˆR δˆR1−ǫˆ
and under this isometry the S action on X \ U identifies with the (1, 0)-Hopf action.
We will build the space X in pieces throughout this Section. Let us give a rough description of the steps
involved and break down the role of each subsection. The starting point for our construction is to take
X0 ≡ S 3 × C(S 3 ), which by condition (2) in Proposition 7.1 is the beginning of our X. In Section 7.1 we δ1−ǫ43 3
will construct X1 by first bending the R = C(S1−ǫ) factor down to a sharper cone C(S1/4) . This will give us the extra curvature we need in Sections 7.2 and 7.3 in order to construct X3. The goal of X2 and X3 will be to take the constant S δ3 factor and lift it to a linearly growing factor. That is, outside a compact subset X3 willbeisometrictoC(S3 ×S3 ).
δ3 1/8
In Section 7.4 we will prove a refinement of Theorem 6.1. Namely we will use Theorem 6.1 in order to
construct a family of S 1 invariant metrics (S 3 × S 3, gt) which begin at S 3 × S 3 with the (1, k)-action, end δ3 1/8
at S 3 × S 3 with the (1, 0) action, satisfy Rict > 6 and which have constant volume form. We will apply δ3 1/8
this in Section 7.5 to build X4, which will perform our twisting and end so that outside a compact subset X4 is isometric to an annulus in C(S 3 × S 3 ) with the new action.
δ4 1/16
We still need to take X4 back to the S 3 × R4 geometry, which will require several steps. In Section
7.6 we will construct X5, which outside of a compact subset will turn the linear growth of the second S 3 δ4
factor into a slow polynomial growth. That slow growth will be useful in Section 7.7 to construct X6, which will take the C(S 3 ) factor and increase the size of the cross section until we arrive at C(S 3 ), which is
1/16 1−ǫˆ isometrically very close to R4. Finally in Section 7.8 we will construct X = X7, which will take the first
sphere, which is still growing at a slow polynomial rate, and level it out to constant size S 3ˆ , which will finish δ
the proof of Proposition 7.1.
7.1. Constructing X1. Let us begin with X0 ≡ S 3 × C(S 3 ), which geometrically has a metric which may
be written
δ 1−ǫ
g0 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +(1−ǫ)2r2gS3 . (102)
Our first step of the construction is to shrink down the size of the cone cross section. The purpose of this is to increase the curvature sufficiently so that in the second and third steps we can turn our constant S 3 factor into a cone factor as well.

40 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Let U0 ≡ {r ≤ 1}, then we will define the metric g1 on X1 \ U0 through the ansatz
g1 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +h(r)2gS3 . (103)
If we let a, b, c denote the directions on the first S 3 factor and i, j, k on the second S 3 factor (the one that we are currently viewing as a cross section), then we can compute the nonzero terms of the Ricci curvature of this ansatz as
Ricrr = −3h′′ , h
Ricaa = 2 , δ2
1 − (h′)2 Ricii = 2 h2
h′′ − h .
if r ≤ 10−1 , if10−1 ≤r≤10, if r ≥ 10 .
(104)
    Now let us define h(r) so that
(1 − ǫ)r h(r)≡h′′ <0
(1 − ǫ) + (r − 1)/4
We can build a function as above by smoothing out h(r) = min{(1 − ǫ)r, (1 − ǫ) + (r − 1)/4} near r = 1, the intersection point of the two lines. Observe that we always have |h′| ≤ 1 − ǫ as h′′ < 0, and so we can estimate the Ricci curvature
Ricrr ≥0, Ricaa = 2 ≥ 0,
 δ2
2ǫ − ǫ2
Ricii ≥ h2 ≥0.
Note that outside the region {r ≤ 10} we have that X1 is isometric to S 3 × C(S 3 ). Let us change
isometric to
g1 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +(r/4)2gS3 . (106)
7.2. Constructing X2. Let us now define X2 by changing the metric on X1 in the region X1 \ U1. Our goal over the next two steps will be to turn the constant S δ3 factor into a cone factor. Let us begin by defining the metric g2 on X2 \ U1 through the ansatz
g2≡dr2+f(r)2gS3 +h(r)2gS3. (107) We can compute the nonzero terms of the Ricci curvature of this ansatz as
(105)
 δ 1/4
coordinates r → r − 1 + 4(1 − ǫ). Set R1 ≡ 20, and U1 ≡ {r ≤ R1} in the new coordinates. Then X1 \ U1 is

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 41
Ricrr =−3h′′ −3f′′ , hf
Ricaa = 2 − f′′ − f′􏰊2f′ +3h′􏰋, f2fffh
1−(h′)2 h′′ h′ f′
Ricii = 2 h2 − h − 3 h f . (108)
Let us denote R2 ≡ 104, and let δ2 ≤ δ2(δ) be a constant we will choose in the next subsections. Let us choose a smooth f (r) so that
            δ
f(r)≡0<R2 f′′ <δ2     δ + δ 2 ( r − R 2 )
−1 ifr≤10 R2,
if10−1R2 ≤r≤10R2, i f r ≥ 1 0 R 2 .
We can build f (r) by smoothing out f (r) = min{δ, δ + δ2(r − R2)} near r = R2, the intersection point. Let h(r) be a smooth function such that
r/4 if r ≤ 10−2R ,  2
 ′′ −2 4
h < 0 if 10 R ≤ r ≤ 10 R ,
h ( r ) ≡  2 2 ′′−4 −1
R2h <−10 if10 R2 ≤r≤10R2,
R2/4+(r−R2)/6 ifr≥102R2.
We can build such a function by similarly smoothing out h(r) = min{r/4, R2/4 + (r − R2)/6} near r = R2.
Observe that the ending metric will have both sphere factors end with a linear growth, but the center of cones will be different for the first and second spheres. Our construction of X3 will fix this, for now let us compute the Ricci tensor of the above.
We will choose δ2 in a future subsection, however we will impose the restriction now that
δ2 ≤ 10−9δ = 10−6 δ . (109)
R2
Note that away from the interval r ∈ [10−1R2,10R2] the Ricci curvature is nonnegative by similar compu- tations as the last subsection. The interval r ∈ [10−1R2,10R2] is a little more complicated. We use that for every r ∈ [10−2R2, 10R2] it holds
 f′(r) ≤ 10δ2 δ≤ f(r)≤2δ
R2 ≤h(r)≤7R2, 44
(110)
  to conclude that

42
ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
3 􏰊4·10−4 δ2􏰋 Ricrr≥R2 7·R2−δ>0,
Ricaa ≥ 1 􏰊 1 − δ2 − 200 δ2 − 60 δ2 􏰋 > 0 , fδR2 δR2
1􏰊 15 10−4 15 δ2􏰋 Ricii≥h14·R+R −2·δ>0.
22
g2 ≡dr2 +(δ+δ2(r−R2))2gS3 +(R2/4+(r−R2)/6)2gS3 , (112) 7.3. Constructing X3. Our space X2 has ended so that it looks like a cone over each of the sphere factors,
however the centers of those cone points are not the same. Specifically let us write the metric in the form
g2 =dr2 +δ2(r+c2)2gS3 +(R2/4+(r−R2)/6)2gS3 , (113)
where c2 ≡ δ−1δ − R2 >> R2 . We will want to change the metric in this subsection so that they are both 2
metric cones with respect to the center c2. We will change the geometry on X2 \ U2 through the ansatz
        (111) NotethatifwedefineU2≡{r≤10R2}thenX2\U2isalmostisometrictoanannulusinC(S3 ×S3).
     Precisely, we have:
g3 ≡dr2 +δ2(r+c2)2gS3 +h(r)2gS3 .
We can compute the nonzero terms of the Ricci curvature of this ansatz as
Ricrr = −3h′′ , h
Ricaa= 2 −1􏰊2+3h′􏰋, δ2(r + c2)2 r + c2 r + c2 h
(114)
(115) Let R3 ≡ 3c2 − 2R2 = R3(δ, δ2) be the point where the lines R2/4 + (r − R2)/6 and (r + c2)/8 intersect.
1/6 δ2
     1 − (h′)2 h′′ 3 h′ Ricii=2 h2 − h −r+c2 h.
    Then we will choose h(r) as a smooth function which satisfies R2/4+(r−R2)/6 ifr≤10 R3,
 −1
h(r)≡h′′ <0 if10−1R ≤r≤10R ,
 3 3 (r + c2)/8 if r ≥ 10R3 .
Note that we may pick such an h by smoothing out h(r) = min{R2/4 + (r − R2)/6, (r + c2)/8}, so that
we may also insist that 1 min{r/6, (r + c2)/8} ≤ h(r) ≤ min{r/6, (r + c2)/8}. As h′′ < 0 we also have that 2
 
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 43
|h′| ≤ 1/6, and so we can compute
Ricrr ≥0,
Ricaa= 1 􏰊 2 − 2 −6􏰋≥0, r + c2 δ2(r + c2) r + c2 r
Ricii ≥ 2 · 35 1 − 1 1 ≥ 0 . (116) 36 h2 16 h2
        If we define δ3 ≡ δ2 and consider the domain U3 ≡ {r ≤ 10R3}, then we have that X3 \ U3 is isometric to C(S 3 × S 3 ). After shifting r → r + c2 this metric is written in coordinates as
δ3 1/8
g3 ≡dr2 +(δ3r)2gS3 +(r/8)2gS3 . (117) Note that in these coordinates we can identify U3 = {r ≤ 10R3 + c2} ⊆ {r ≤ 11R3} .
7.4. Refinement of Theorem 6.1. Theorem 6.1 from Section 6 proved the existence of a family of S1- invariant metrics (S 3 × S 3, gt) which all have positive Ricci, begin and end at the standard metric, but for which the beginning and ending isometric S 1 actions are homotopically inequivalent. In this subsection we would like to construct from this a refinement which will keep control for us various geometric quantities. This refinement will be directly used in the next subsection to build X2.
Lemma 7.2 (Refined Equivariant Twisting). Let (S 3 ×S 3, g0) be a product of two spheres with g0 = gS 3×S 3 , δ 1/8
and take this space to be equipped with the (1, k)-S 1 isometric Hopf action. If δ ≤ δ(k) then there exist a family of metrics gt, and a diffeomorphism φ : S3 × S3 → S3 × S3 such that
(1) The(1,k)-S1 actiononS3 ×S3 isanisometricactionforallt, (2) The Ricci curvature Rict > 6 is uniformly positive,
(3) The volume form dvgt = dvg0 is a constant.
(4) g1 = φ∗gS 3×S 3 with φ􏰁θ ·(k,1) (s1, s2)􏰂 = θ ·(1,0) φ(s1, s2) .
δ 1/8
The construction of the above is in several steps. To begin, let gˆr be the metric from Theorem 6.1, reparametrized so that gˆ1/3 = gS 3×S 3 is the standard metric on S 3 ×S 3 and gˆ2/3 = φ∗gS 3×S 3 is the pullback of the standard metric by our required nontrivial diffeomorphism. Let us first try and normalize this collection. Namely, let us first consider the family of metrics
where
g ̃ r = a r φ ∗r gˆ r , ( 1 1 8 ) ar := a ̃ , (119)
 V o l ( gˆ r ) 1 / 6
a ̃ > 0 is small enough so that Ricargˆr > 6 uniformly in r ∈ [1/3,2/3], and φr : S3 ×S3 → S3 ×S3 is a family
of diffeomorphisms with φ1/3 = Id. Observe that, by construction, Vol(argˆr) is constant with respect to r.
Let us now build the diffeomorphisms φr : S 3 ×S 3 → S 3 ×S 3. Consider first the volume forms νr ≡ dvgˆr . Recall that our remaining challenge is to force this family to be a constant. In order to do so we will follow [Mo] in a spirit related to [CN2], with the additional subtlety that we need to work equivariantly.

44 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
Even though the family νr is not constant, as the action is isometric we do have that νr is invariant under the (1, k)-Hopf action. Let ν ≡ dva0gˆ0 , which (up to multiple) is simply the standard volume form on S 3 ×S 3. Let us write νr ≡ ρrν0, so note that the function ρr is invariant under the (1,k)-hopf action. For each r let us solve on S 3 × S 3
∆fr+⟨∇lnρr,∇fr⟩=−∂ lnρr. (120) ∂r
Observe first that the above is smoothly solvable because 􏰓 ∂ ln ρr · ρrν0 = 􏰓 ∂ ρrν0 = d 􏰓 νr = 0. The ∂r ∂r dr
solution is a unique up to a constant, so if we assume 􏰓 frρrν0 = 0 then the solution is uniquely defined. As the equation and right hand side commute with this action, as the solution is unique we must have that is also invariant by the (1, k)-Hopf action.
Let us now define the family of diffeomorphisms φr : S 3 × S 3 → S 3 × S 3 by φ1/3 = Id and
d φr(x) = ∇fr(φr(x)) for r ≥ 1/3. (121)
     dr
Note that as ∇ fr is invariant by the (1, k)-Hopf action we get that φr commutes with the (1, k)-Hopf action.
We also get that
d φ∗r νr = 􏰁 ∂ ln ρr + ∆ fr + ⟨∇ ln ρr , ∇ fr ⟩􏰂νr = 0 . dr ∂r
(122)
(123)
  From this we have built a family of metrics g ̃r such that g ̃ 1 / 3 = a 1 / 3 g S 3 × S 3 ,
g ̃2/3 = a1/3 φ∗2/3φ∗gS 3×S 3 ≡ a1/3φ∗gS 3×S 3 , d v g ̃ r = a 61 / 3 d v S 3 × S 3 ,
Ricg ̃r >6.
We can now finish the construction with one more interpolation. Let us define the family gr by brg 3 +crg 3 if0≤r≤1/3
S S  b1/3
gr =a1/3 g ̃r if1/3≤r≤2/3 φ∗􏰊drgS3 +ergS3􏰋 if2/3≤r≤1.
 Here we have that br , cr are smooth functions such that
b0 =1/8, c0 =δ, b1/3 =c1/3, br ·cr =const=δ/8,
Note we need b1/3 a1/3
on δ given by
d2/3 =e2/3 =b1/3, d1 =1/8, e1 =δ, dr ·er =const=δ/8.
≤ 1, so that the Ricci curvature of the above satisfies Ric > 6. This becomes a restriction
(124)
 δ ≤ 8a21/3 ≤ δ(k) . (125) This finishes the construction of Lemma 7.2 􏰞

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 45
7.5. Constructing X4. Recall that in the construction of X3 we had a variable δ3 = δ2 which had not yet been fixed. Let us now use Lemma 7.2 and Section 7.2 to fix δ2 = δ2(k). Recall there is a compact subset U3 ⊆ X3 such that X3 \ U3 is isometric
g2 =dr2 +(δ3r)2gS3 +(r/8)2gS3 . (126) In order to construct X4 let us modify the metric on X3 \ U3 by looking at an ansatz of the form
g4 ≡ dr2 + h(r)2gr , (127)
where gr will be some family of metrics on S 3 × S 3. Following a line of construction similar to [CN2], if we assume that the volume forms on gr are constant, then we can compute the Ricci curvature of the above ansatz as
         where g′ ab
Ricrr = −6h′′ − 1gabgcdg′acg′bd , h4
Ricir = 1􏰊∂a􏰁gabg′bi􏰂+ 1(gab)′(∂igab −gibgpq∂agpq)􏰋, 22
R i c i j = R i c gi j + h 2 􏰊 − h ′ ′ − 5 􏰁 h ′ 􏰂 2 􏰋 g i j + 􏰊 − 7 h ′ g ′i j + 1 g a b g ′a i g ′b j 􏰋 , hh2h2
= ∂ gab and analogously for (gab)′. ∂r
( 1 2 8 )
(129)
 Let 104R3 < R4 < ∞ be chosen momentarily. To define h(r) let us consider the three functions h1(r) = r ,
h2(r)=103R3+􏰊1−1+ 1 ln(ln(15R3))􏰋(r−103R3), 4 16 ln(ln(r))
h3(r)=103R3+􏰊1−1+ 1 ln(ln(15R3))􏰋(10R4−103R3)+(r−10R4)/2. 4 16 ln(ln(10R4))
      Note that h1 and h3 are linear functions, while h2 is almost linear but has a slight amount of convexity added. Observe that all of the normalizing constants are built so that h1 and h2 intersect at 103R3, while h2 and h3 intersect at 10R4. We will want to build a smooth h(r) of the form
h1(r) ifr≤10 R3,  2
 ′′ 2 2 h<0 if10R≤r≤10R,
 3 4 h(r) ≡ 
h2(r) if 104R3 ≤ r ≤ R4 , h3(r) if r ≥ 102R4 .
We can build such a function h as above by smoothing out the function h(r) = min{h1(r), h2(r), h3(r)} at the relevant intersection points.
We define the family of metrics gr as follows. Consider first the metrics g ̃t defined in Lemma 7.2. In the range r ≤ 104R3 let gr = g ̃0, and in the range r ≥ R4 let gr = g ̃1. In these two ranges the nonnegativity of the Ricci curvature follows by computations analogous to the previous subsections.

46 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
In the range r ∈ [104R3,R4] we proceed as follows. Let t : [104R3,R4] → [0,1] be a smooth function such that
t(r) = ln ln ln(r) − ln ln ln(104R3) . (130) ln ln ln(R4) − ln ln ln(104R3)
Note that t(r) has the property that t(104R3) = 0 and t(R4) = 1. We define gr = g ̃t(r). Note that we have not yet defined R4.
 Let M > 0 be such that
Thus we can estimate
|g′|g +|∇g′|g ≤ 1 ·
|∇g ̃|g ̃ + |g ̃′|g ̃ + |∇g ̃′|g ̃ ≤ M , uniformly in t ∈ [0, 1] .
(131)
(132)
(133)
(134) (135)
(136)
1 (|g ̃′|g ̃ +|g ̃′|g ̃) ln ln ln(R4) − ln ln ln(104R3)
r · ln(r) · ln ln(r) ln ln ln(R4) − ln ln ln(104R3) Notice that r ≤ h(r) ≤ r, and 0 ≤ h′(r) ≤ 1 for every r ∈ [104R3,R4], hence
  r · ln(r) · ln ln(r) ≤M·1.
   2
for every r ∈ [104R3, R4].
From the expression (128), we can estimate the diagonal Ricci terms
Ricrr ≥−6h′′ −|g′|2g ≥ 1 lnln(15R3)
h 100 r2 · ln(r) · (ln ln(r))2
R i c i i ≥ 6 − h h ′ ′ − 5 ( h ′ ) 2 − 7 | g ′ | g − 1 | g ′ | 2g ≥ 1 , 2r 2 2
provided R4 = R4(M) is chosen big enough. The cross term has the estimate,
h′(r) ≤ 1 h(r) r
h′′(r)≤− 1 lnln(15R3) , h(r) 100 r2 · ln(r) · (ln ln(r))2
     ,
      ′ ′ 2(M + 1)2
|Ricir| ≤ 2(|g |g + |∇g |g)(1 + |∇g|g) ≤ r · ln(r) · ln ln(r) · ln ln ln(R4) − ln ln ln(104R3)
≤1, r · ln(r) · ln ln(r)
1
   again, assuming R4 = R4(M) big enough.
Note that the negativity of the cross term Ricir dominates the positivity of the radial Ricrr. However, it is
itself dominated by the positivity of the cross section Ricii. Consider now a direction v = a∂r + b ∂i, then we r
 can estimate
a2 ln ln(15R3) ab b2 Ricvv ≥ 100r2 ·ln(r)·(lnln(r))2 −2r2 ·ln(r)·lnln(r) + 2r2 .
(137)
    
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 47
Let us split the above into two cases. If b ≤ a then the negative term is dominated by the first term 103 ln ln r
when r ≥ R (R , M). On the other hand, if b ≥ a then the negative middle term is dominated by the 4 3 103 ln ln r
last term when r ≥ R4(R3, M). In any situation we then see for r ≥ R4(R3, M) that Ric > 0 is positive.
  Note that for U4 ≡ {r ≤ 102R4} we have that X4 \ U4 is isometric to C(S 3 δ3/2
g3 ≡dr2 +(δ4r)2gS3 +(r/16)2gS3 .
× S 3 ) ≡ C(S 3 1/16 δ4
× S 3 ): 1/16
(138)
7.6. Constructing X5. To construct X5 we want to modify X4 on the neighborhood X4 \ U4. The goal will be to end so that the second S 3 factor is growing at a slow polynomial rate. Our ansatz will be of the form
dr2 + f(r)2gS3 +(r/16)2gS3 . The Ricci curvature of this ansatz may be computed
Ricrr =−3f′′ , f
Ricaa = 2 − f′′ − f′􏰊2f′ +3􏰋, f2fffr
(139)
(140) For 0 < α << 1, which will be chosen in the next construction, let us consider a function f of the form
      Ricii = 2 162 − 1 − 3 f ′ . r2 rf
   δ4r
f(r)≡f′′ <0
 􏰊 􏰋α
102δR r
4 4 102R4
if r ≤ 10R4 ,
if10R4 ≤r≤103R4,
ifr≥103R . 4
 To build such an f one can smooth the function f ≡ min 􏰛δ r, 102δ R 􏰊 r 􏰋α􏰜. Note that these two func- 4 4 4 102R4
warped product
7.7. Constructing X6. The next step of the construction is dedicated to increasing the size of the cone S3 factor until we are again geometrically close to R4. We will construct X6 by modifying X5 on the neighborhood X5 \ U5. The ansatz of our new metric will take the form
g6 = dr2 + 􏰁c5rα􏰂2gS 3 + h(r)2gS 3 . (142)
 tions agree at 102R4 by construction. If we plug this into (140) we see that the resulting space has Ric ≥ 0. IfwedefineR≡104R,c≡102δR􏰊1 􏰋αandU≡{r≤R},thenX\Uisisometrictothe
5 55 44102R4 5 5 55
g5 =dr2 +􏰁c5rα􏰂2gS3 +(r/16)2gS3 . (141)
 
48
ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
The nonzero terms of the Ricci tensor may be computed as Ricrr =−3h′′ +3α(1−α),
  h r2
Ric = 2 + α(1 − α) − α 􏰊 2α + 3 h′ 􏰋 ,
aa􏰁c5rα􏰂2 r2 rrh 1 − (h′)2 h′′ 3α h′
     Ricii = 2 h2 − h − r h . (143) Recall the construction of X5 depended on the parameter α > 0, let us now choose α = 10−3ǫˆ. Then for
    R6 = R6(ǫˆ) we can choose a smooth function h(r) so that it satisfies 

r/16 if r ≤ 10R5 ,
 ′ −1 ′′ −10
h(r)≡|h|<(1−10 ǫˆ), |rh |<10 ǫˆ if10R5 ≤r≤10 R6,
−1
If we plug this into (140) then we see that Ric ≥ 0. If we let U6 ≡ {r ≤ R6} then we see that X6 \ U6 is
(1 − ǫˆ)r if r ≥ 10−1R6 . isometric to the warped product
g6 = dr2 + 􏰁c5rα􏰂2gS 3 + (1 − ǫˆ)2r2gS 3 . (144)
7.8. Constructing X = X7. We are now in a position to finish the construction of X and prove Proposition 7.1. The last step of the construction just needs to flatten out the first S 3 factor back into a cross product. Recall that we have built X6 and that outside of U6 we have that it is isometric to
g6 = dr2 + 􏰁c5rα􏰂2gS 3 + (1 − ǫˆ)2r2gS 3 . We will look to alter this metric by looking for an ansatz of the form
g 7 = d r 2 + f ( r ) 2 g S 3 + ( 1 − ǫˆ ) 2 r 2 g S 3 . The nonzero Ricci curvatures of this ansatz can be computed
Ricrr =−3f′′ , f
Ricaa = 2 − f′′ − f′􏰊2f′ +3􏰋, f2fffr
Ricii = 􏰊 1 − 1􏰋 2 − 3 f ′ . (1−ǫˆ)2 r2 rf
We will choose a smooth function f (r) of the form
c5rα if r ≤ 10R6 ,
f(r)≡f′′ <0 if10R ≤r≤104R , 56
 δˆ i f r ≥ 1 0 4 R 6 .
(145)
( 1 4 6 )
(147)
          
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 49
If δˆ = δˆ(c5, R6) then we can build such a function f by smoothing the function f (r) = min{c5rα, c5(103R6)α} ≡ min{c5rα, δˆ} . By plugging this into (147) we see that Ric ≥ 0.
This completes the construction of X, let us finally check that all the requirements in Proposition 7.1 are satisfied.
Globally on X, we have a doubly warped product metric
g=dr2+f(r)2gS3 +h(r)2gS3 (148)
hence, the (1, k)-Hopf action on S 3 ×S 3 induces an isometric S 1 action on X. By construction, in U = {r ≤ 1} themetricisg=dr2 +δ2gS3 +(1−ǫ)2r2gS3.
If we let R7 ≡ 105R6 and U7 ≡ {r ≤ R7} then we see that X7 \ U7 is isometric to
g 7 = d r 2 + δˆ 2 g S 3 + ( 1 − ǫˆ ) 2 r 2 g S 3 , ( 1 4 9 )
through a map induced by φ, the diffeomorphism built in Lemma 7.2. Hence, it is immediate to see that in these coordinates the S 1 action on X identifies with the (1, 0)-Hopf action. 􏰞
8. STEP 3: EXTENDING THE ACTION
In this Section we focus on the third step of the construction, which was outlined in Section 3.1.3. The
primary goal of this step of the construction is to extend the Γ j action on M j to a Γ j+1 action on M j+1 . Recall
that Γj+1 is generated by γj+1 such that γkj+1 = γj ∈ Γj. j+1
InordertoaccomplishthiswewillbeginwithamodelspaceBj+1 =B(ǫj+1,δj+1)≈S3×R4,pluckout kj+1 balls S3 × D4 and glue in copies of Mj. To do this precisely, and in order to preserve the geometry in the process, the main technical Proposition we need to prove in this Section is the following:
Proposition 8.1 (Step 3: Action Extension). Let ǫ,ǫ′,δ > 0 with 0 < ǫ − ǫ′ ≤ ǫ , and let Γˆ ≤ Q/Z ⊆ S1 102
be a finite subgroup with Γ = ⟨γ,Γˆ⟩ such that γˆ ≡ γk is the generator of Γˆ. Then for ǫˆ ≤ ǫˆ(ǫ,ǫ′) there exists a pointed space (A ̃ , p), isometric to a smoooth Riemannian manifold with Ric ≥ 0 away from k + 1 singular three spheres, with an isometric and free action by Γ such that
 (1) ThereexistsΓ-invariantsetB10−1(p)⊆U′ ⊆B10(p)whichisisometrictoS3×B1(0)⊆S3×C(S3 ′)
δ δ 1−ǫ (2) There exists Γ-invariant set B103k(p) ⊆ U ⊆ B105k(p) such that A ̃ \U is isometric to S δ3 ×A104k,∞(0) ⊆
and such that Γ is induced by the (1,k)-Hopf action on S3 × S3 ′ , δ 1−ǫ
S3 ×C(S3 )andsuchthatΓisinducedbythe(1,k)-HopfactiononS3 ×S3
δ 1−ǫˆ δ 1−ǫ
(3) There exists Γ-invariant sets Sδ3 × B2−1(xa) ⊆ Va ⊆ Sδ3 × B2(xa) with d(Sδ3 × {xa},Sδ3 × {p}) = 102k which are isometric to S3 × B1(0) ⊆ S3 × C(S3 ) and such that Γˆ is induced by the (1,0)-Hopf
33δ δ1−ǫˆ a c t i o n o n S δ × S 1 − ǫˆ .
The construction will come in three steps. We will begin with A ̃0 = S 3 × C(S 3 ′ ), which we see by (1) δ 1−ǫ ̃
is what our space should look like on small scales. In Section 8.1 we will construct A1 by adding a bend to A ̃0. The effect of this will be that on large scales the space looks like S 3 × C(S 3 ), however on some
 ̃ δ 1−ǫ
middle scale A1 will be isometric to an annulus in a 4-sphere S R4 , where R = R(ǫ′, ǫ, k) is potentially very

50 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
large.
In Section 8.2 we will construct the gluing pieces Aˆ by beginning with Aˆ0 = S3 ×C(S3 ) and bending it
 ̃ ˆ δ 1−ǫˆ
in an analogous manner to which we built A1. However, A will have boundary and near the boundary will
be isometric to a small annulus in the 4-sphere S R4 .
We see we are now able to glue copies of Aˆ into A ̃1 as an open set near boundary of Aˆ is isometric to a region in A ̃1. We will want to glue k copies of Aˆa = Aˆ into A ̃1 in order to complete our construction, however as in the discussion in Section 3.1.3 we need to be careful about the choice of gluing maps. This will be done in Section 8.3.
8.1. Constructing A1. Let us begin with A ̃0 ≡ S 3 × C(S 3 ′ ), which geometrically has the metric δ 1−ǫ
g0 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +(1−ǫ′)2r2gS3 . (150) Let U0 = {r ≤ 1}, then we will build A ̃1 by modifying the above metric on the region A ̃0 \ U0. We will
look for a metric which is of the form
g1 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +h(r)2gS3 . The nonzero Ricci curvatures of a warped metric as above are
Ricrr = −3h′′ , h
Ricaa = 2 , δ2
1 − (h′)2 Ricii = 2 h2
(151)
(152)
(153)
  Our goal will be to show for appropriate constants R, rR, rǫ , rˆ and r1 ∈ [10k, 103 k] that we can choose h(r) in the form
h1(r) if r ≤ 10,
 ′′ 4
h <0 if10≤r≤10 k, h(r) ≡ 
  h 2 ( r ) i f r 1 ≤ r ≤ r 1 + rˆ , h3(r) if r ≥ 104k .
h′′ − h .
  In order to choose our warping function h(r) let us begin by defining the following three functions:
h1(r) ≡ (1 − ǫ′)r ,
h2(r) ≡ R sin 􏰁R−1(r − rR)􏰂 , h3(r) ≡ (1 − ǫ)(r + rǫ ) .

√ ≤
Hence, if √ǫ − √ǫ′ ≤ 10−1 √ǫ, we can deduce
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 51
If we have an h(r) then by (152) we have that
2 1 − (1 − ǫ′)2
Ricrr≥0, Ricaa=δ2 >0, Ricii≥ h2 >0. (154)
  Recall now that ǫ′ < ǫ have already been fixed, and the lines h1(r) and h3(r) must intersect at a unique point. Let us choose rǫ uniquely so that the point of intersection is at 102k. In particular, we can solve for rǫ as
rǫ ≡ǫ−ǫ′102k. (155) 1−ǫ
With rǫ fixed, let us observe that for any R ≥ 0 there is a unique smallest rR ∈ (0,2πR] such that h2(r) ≤ min{h1(r), h3(r)} for every r > 0. Note for this rR that h2(r) intersects h1(r) and h3(r) at most once, but must intersect one of them (otherwise h2 < min{h1, h3} and we could have decreased rR). On the other hand, note that for R small we must have that h2(r) intersects h1(r), while for R large we must have that h2(r) intersects h3(r). We can then also find a unique value of R = R(ǫ,ǫ′,k) for which h2 intersects both h1 and h3. Let us fix this as our value of R and hence rR, and let us call these intersection points s1 < 102k < s2 respectively.
 In order to estimate the value of rR let us observe that h2(r) ≤ r − rR, and as such we get that (1 − ǫ′)s1 = h1(s1) = h2(s1) ≤ s1 − rR
=⇒ rR ≤ǫ′s1 ≤102kǫ′.
Let us observe that h ̇2(s1) = h ̇1(s1) and h ̇2(s3) = h ̇3(s3) to get the relations
cos(R−1(s1 − rR)) = 1 − ǫ′ ,
cos(R−1(s2 − rR)) = 1 − ǫ ,
=⇒ 􏰉􏰉􏰉s1 − rR − √2ǫ′R􏰉􏰉􏰉 ≤ 10ǫ′R 􏰉√􏰉
􏰉􏰉s2−rR− 2ǫR􏰉􏰉≤10ǫR,
=⇒ |s1 − √2ǫ′R| ≤ 10(10k + R)ǫ′ ,
|s2 − √2ǫR| ≤ 10(10k + R)ǫ ,
where we used the Taylor expansion of cos(x) and the fact that s1 − rR, s2 − rR ∈ (0, 2πR].
Using that s1 ≤ 102k ≤ s2, this gives the estimate on R:
|102k − √2ǫR| ≤ max{|s1 − √2ǫR|, |s2 − √2ǫR|}
(156)
       􏰊 √ǫ − √ǫ′ 􏰋
2ǫR √ǫ + 20(10k + R)ǫ .
3 􏰊√ √ǫ−√ǫ′􏰋 􏰉R − √2ǫ 􏰉 ≤ 10 k ǫ + √ǫ .
(157)
(158) (159)
(160)
         􏰉􏰉 102k􏰉􏰉
      
52 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
From this we get the estimate
􏰉􏰉􏰉(s −s )− √ǫ− √ǫ′102k􏰉􏰉􏰉≤104k√ǫ􏰊1+􏰊√ǫ− √ǫ′􏰋2􏰋.
(161)
     21√ǫ √ǫ √ǫ−√ǫ′ 2 1 2
      Hence,wecandefinerˆ:= 100√ǫ 10 k≤ 10 ·10 k. Then we may build h(r) by smoothing out
   h1(r) h ( r ) ≡    h ( r )
 
if r ≤ s1 ,
i f s ≤ r ≤ s ,
2 1 2 h3(r) if r ≥ s2 .
8.2. Construction of Aˆ. Let us begin with Aˆ0 ≡ S3 × C(S3 ) on the domain Uˆ0 ≡ {r ≤ rˆ}, where √√ δ 1−ǫˆ
 rˆ ≡ ǫ−√ǫ′ 102k was defined in the previous section. The metric on Aˆ0 may be written 100 ǫ
gˆ0 ≡dr2 +δ2gS3 +(1−ǫˆ)2r2gS3 .
In order to construct Aˆ we will need to alter the geometry by looking for a metric of the form
(162)
   gˆ ≡ d r 2 + δ 2 g S 3 + h ( r ) 2 g S 3 .
We will build h(r) in a manner analogous to the previous subsection. Let us start by looking at the
functions
( 1 6 3 )
h2(r) ≡ R sin 􏰁R−1(r − rˆR)􏰂 , (164)
h 1 ( r ) ≡ ( 1 − ǫˆ ) r ,
where R = R(ǫ, ǫ′, k) > 0 has been fixed in the previous subsection. Observe that h1 and h2 will intersect twice for rˆR small, and for rˆR large they will not intersect. Let us choose rˆR uniquely so that they intersect at sˆ precisely once. Note that at this point of intersection sˆ we will then have h ̇1(sˆ) = h ̇2(sˆ), which is the equation
cos(R−1(sˆ − rˆR)) = 1 − ǫˆ , 􏰉√􏰉
=⇒􏰉􏰉sˆ−rˆR− 2ǫˆR􏰉􏰉≤ǫˆR. Additionally, using that h2(r) ≤ r − rˆR we have the inequality
( 1 − ǫˆ ) sˆ = h 1 ( sˆ ) = h 2 ( sˆ ) ≤ sˆ − rˆ R , =⇒ rˆR ≤ǫˆsˆ.
Combining the last two estimates we conclude
􏰉􏰉􏰉sˆ − √2ǫˆR􏰉􏰉􏰉 ≤ (ǫˆ + √2ǫˆ3/2)R ,
rˆ R ≤ 2 ǫˆ R .
(165)
(166)
( 1 6 7 )
   Let us now choose ǫˆ ≤ ǫˆ(R) ≤ ǫˆ(ǫ, ǫ′) so that sˆ ≤ 1 rˆ. Then we can define h(r) for r ≤ 2sˆ by smoothing 2
 
FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 53
h(r) ≡ h1(r) if r ≤ sˆ ,
 h 2 ( r ) i f sˆ ≤ r ≤ 2 sˆ .
In particular, for Aˆ = {r ≤ 2sˆ} we see that a neighborhood of the boundary is isometric to the product of S δ3 with an annulus in S R4 . The verification that Ric ≥ 0 with this choice of h is completely analogous to the one discussed in the previous subsection, using (152).
8.3. Constructing A ̃. As our final step let us now denote Aˆa for a = 0,...,k − 1 as k copies of our constructed neck from the last subsection. If we denote r ̃ ≡ 2sˆ − rˆR < rR then we have
∂ Aˆ a = { r = 2 sˆ } ≡ S δ3 × ∂ B r ̃ ⊆ S δ3 × S R4 , ( 1 6 8 ) be the boundary of our neck region. The boundary, and indeed all of Aˆa near the boundary, is isometric to a
neighborhood in S δ3 × S R4 .
Recall that A ̃1 has a metric of the form
g ̃ 1 ≡ d r 2 + δ 2 g S 3 + h ( r ) 2 g S 3 , ( 1 6 9 )
such that the region {102k − rˆ ≤ r ≤ 102k + rˆ} is isometric to an annulus in S δ3 × S R4 . In the coordinates from the above description let us choose the point x0 = (102k,e,e) ∈ A ̃1 so that r(x0) = 102k, where e ∈ S3 is the identity. Let xa = (102 k, (2πa/k) · e, e) be the Hopf rotation of x0 by angle 2πa/k. Consider the domains S δ3 × B r ̃ ( x a ) , a n d l e t
φ 0 : ∂ Aˆ 0 = S δ3 × ∂ B r ̃ → S δ3 × ∂ B r ̃ ( x 0 ) , ( 1 7 0 ) be the canonical isometry which fixes the S δ3 factor. Let γ ∈ Γ be the action which Hopf rotates the first S 3
factor by 2π/|γ| and Hopf rotates the second S 3 factor by 2π/k. Then we define the mappings
φ a : ∂ Aˆ a → S δ3 × ∂ B r ̃ ( x a ) , b y φ a ≡ γ a · φ 0 . ( 1 7 1 )
This allows us to define our space
A ̃ ≡ 􏰊 A ̃ 1 \ 􏰘 S δ3 × B r ̃ ( x a ) 􏰋 􏰘 Aˆ a . ( 1 7 2 ) a φa
Note that this gluing extends isometrically to a small neighborhood, and A ̃ is a smooth manifold (away from (k + 1) singular three spheres) with Ric ≥ 0. Additionally, we have the required property that Γ = ⟨γ⟩ acts isometrically on A ̃ such that in both the A ̃1 domain and the glued domains Aˆa the action of γk = γˆ is purely by Hopf rotation of the S δ3 factor. 􏰞

54 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
9. GEOMETRY OF THE MAPPING CLASS GROUP OF S 3 × S 3
The primary goal of this Section is to prove Lemma 1.2, which we restate for the readers convenience
below:
Lemma 9.1 (Mapping Class Group and Ricci Curvature on S 3 ×S 3). Let g0 = gS 3×S 3 be the standard metric on S3 × S3. Then given φ ∈ Diff(S3 × S3) there exists a smooth family gt of metrics with Ricgt > 0 such thatg0 isthestandardmetricandg1 =φ∗g0. Thatis,theorbitπ0Diff(S3 ×S3)·[gS3×S3]ofthemapping class group lives in a connected component of M+0 (S 3 × S 3), the space of metrics with strictly positive Ricci curvature.
Let us begin by recalling some basic structure of the mapping class group π0Diff(S 3 × S 3). So consider Diff(S 3×S 3), the diffeomorphism group of S 3×S 3, and let π0Diff(S 3×S 3) denote the connected components of it. This set inherits a group structure, and the mapping class group of S 3 × S 3 is a discrete group. There is a natural surjective mapping
κ : π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) → SL(2, Z) , (173) given by looking at the action of [φ] ∈ π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) on the homology ring κ[φ] = [φ∗] : H3(S 3 × S 3) →
H3(S 3 × S 3). It is now well understood, see [Kre],[Kry], that the kernel
K=kerκ⊳π0Diff(S3 ×S3) (174)
is a 2-step nilpotent group and obeys the short exact sequence
0→Z28 →K→Z×Z→0. (175)
This kernel and its Z28 extension are closely related to the exotic differentiable structures on seven mani- folds. The group π0Diff(S 3 × S 3)/K = SL(2, Z) is generated by the two diffeomorphisms
φ1(g1, g2) = (g1, g1g2) ,
φ2(g1, g2) = (g1g−1, g2) , (176)
see [Kry]. On the other hand the kernel K, which is the collection of diffeomorphisms whose induced action on the homology is trivial, can be identified as the nilpotent group
(177)
(178)
(179)
1 a c    
K=0 1 b, a,b∈Z, c∈Z .  28
0 0 1
It is generated by two elements, which are given by the diffeomorphisms
φK(g1, g2) = (g2g1g−1, g2) , 12
φK(g1, g2) = (g1, g1g2g−1) . 21
In particular, if we consider the diffeomorphisms
φ3(g1, g2) = (g1, g2g−1) , 1
φ4(g1, g2) = (g2g1, g2) ,
2

FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS AND THE MILNOR CONJECTURE 55
then we see that {φ1, φ2, φ3, φ4} generates π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) .
Now it follows from Theorem 6.1 and Remark 6.1 that there exist families of metrics g1,t,g2,t,g3,t,g4,t
with Ric > 0 such that
gj,0 =gS3×S3 ,
gj,1 =φ∗jgS3×S3 . (180)
To prove the Theorem it is now enough to show for each [φ] ∈ π0Diff(S 3 × S 3) that there exists some representative φ ∈ [φ] for which the Theorem holds, as we can clearly vary the metric within a fixed class by the diffeomorphism action itself. Thus let φ = φ jk ◦ · · · ◦ φ j1 represent any element of the mapping class group. If we denote j0 = 0 with φ0 = Id, then let us define the family of metrics
gt ≡φ∗jl ◦···◦φ∗j0gj ,k(t−l) if t∈􏰃l,l+1􏰄. (181) l+1k kk
Then we have that Rict > 0 with g0 = gS3×S3 and g1 = φ∗gS3×S3, as claimed. 􏰞 REFERENCES
   [A]
[Be]
[Bi]
[CV] [CN1]
[CN2]
[FG]
[GPT]
[Gr1] [Gr2]
[KPT] [KW] [Kre]
ANDERSON, MICHAEL T., On the topology of complete manifolds of nonnegative Ricci curvature. Topology 29 (1990), no. 1, 41–55.
BESSE, ARTHUR L., Einstein manifolds. Reprint of the 1987 edition. Classics in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2008. xii+516 pp.
BISHOP, RICHARD L., A relation between volume, mean curvaure, and diameter. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 10 (1963) 364.
COHN-VOSSEN, STEFAN, Ku ̈rzeste Wege und Totalkru ̈mmung auf Fla ̈chen. Compositio Math. 2 (1935), 69–133. COLDING, TOBIAS HOLCK; NABER, AARON, Sharp Ho ̈lder continuity of tangent cones for spaces with a lower Ricci curvature bound and applications. Ann. of Math. (2) 176 (2012), no. 2, 1173–1229.
COLDING, TOBIAS HOLCK; NABER, AARON, Characterization of tangent cones of noncollapsed limits with lower Ricci bounds and applications. Geom. Funct. Anal. 23 (2013), no. 1, 134–148.
FUKAYA, KENJI; YAMAGUCHI, TAKAO, The fundamental groups of almost non-negatively curved manifolds. Ann. of Math. (2) 136 (1992), no. 2, 253–333.
GILKEY, PETER B.; PARK, JEONGHYEONG; TUSCHMANN, WILDERICH, Invariant metrics of positive Ricci curvature on principal bundles. Math. Z. 227 (1998), no. 3, 455–463.
GROMOV, MIKHAEL, Almost flat manifolds. J. Differential Geometry 13 (1978), no. 2, 231–241.
GROMOV, MIKHAEL, Groups of polynomial growth and expanding maps. Inst. Hautes E ́tudes Sci. Publ. Math. No. 53 (1981), 53–73.
KAPOVITCH, VITALI; PETRUNIN, ANTON; TUSCHMANN, WILDERICH, Nilpotency, almost nonnegative curvature, and the gradient flow on Alexandrov spaces. Ann. of Math. (2) 171 (2010), no. 1, 343–373.
KAPOVITCH, VITALI; WILKING, BUKHARD, Structure of fundamental groups of manifolds with Ricci curvature bounded below, preprint arXiv:1105.5955 (2011).
KRECK, MATTHIAS, Isotopy classes of diffeomorphisms of (k − 1)−connected almost-parallelizable 2k-manifolds. Al- gebraic topology, Aarhus 1978 (Proc. Sympos., Univ. Aarhus, Aarhus, 1978), pp. 643–663, Lecture Notes in Math., 763, Springer, Berlin, 1979.

56 ELIA BRUE ́ , AARON NABER AND DANIELE SEMOLA
[Kry] KRYLOV, NIKOLAI A., On the Jacobi group and the mapping class group of S 3 × S 3. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 355 (2003), no. 1, 99–117.
[Li] L I , P E T E R , Large time behavior of the heat equation on complete manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature. Ann. of Math. (2) 124 (1986), no. 1, 1–21.
[Liu] LIU, GANG, 3-manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature. Invent. Math. 193 (2013), no. 2, 367–375.
[Mi] MILNOR, JOHN, A note on curvature and fundamental group. J. Differential Geometry 2 (1968), 1–7.
[Mo] MOSER, JU ̈ RGEN, On the volume elements on a manifold. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 120 (1965), 286–294.
[Na] NASH, JOHN C., Positive Ricci curvature on fibre bundles. J. Differential Geometry 14 (1979), no. 2, 241–254. [O] O’NEILL, BARRETT, The fundamental equations of a submersion. Michigan Math. J. 13 (1966), 459–469.
[Pa1] PAN, JIAYIN, A proof of Milnor conjecture in dimension 3. J. Reine Angew. Math. 758 (2020), 253–260.
[Pa2] PAN, JIAYIN, Nonnegative Ricci curvature, stability at infinity and finite generation of fundamental groups. Geom. Topol. 23 (2019), no. 6, 3203–3231.
[Pa3] PAN, JIAYIN, On the escape rate of geodesic loops in an open manifold with nonnegative Ricci curvature. Geom. Topol. 25 (2021), no. 2, 1059–1085.
[PW] PAN, JIAYIN; WEI, GUOFANG, Semi-local simple connectedness of non-collapsing Ricci limit spaces. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 24 (2022), no. 12, 4027–4062.
[Pe] P E T E R S E N , P E T E R , Riemannian geometry. Third edition. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 171. Springer, Cham, 2016. xviii+499 pp.
[PT] PETRUNIN, A.; TUSCHMANN, W., Diffeomorphism finiteness, positive pinching, and second homotopy. Geom. Funct. Anal. 9 (1999), no. 4, 736–774.
[Po] POOR, W. A., Some exotic spheres with positive Ricci curvature. Math. Ann. 216 (1975), no. 3, 245–252.
[SY] SCHOEN, RICHARD; YAU, SHING TUNG, Complete three-dimensional manifolds with positive Ricci curvature and scalar curvature. Seminar on Differential Geometry, pp. 209–228, Ann. of Math. Stud., 102, Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, N.J., 1982.
[So1] SORMANI, CHRISTINA, Nonnegative Ricci curvature, small linear diameter growth and finite generation of fundamental
groups. J. Differential Geom. 54 (2000), no. 3, 547–559.
[So2] SORMANI, CHRISTINA, On loops representing elements of the fundamental group of a complete manifold with nonneg-
ative Ricci curvature. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 50 (2001), no. 4, 1867–1883.
[SW1] SORMANI, CHRISTINA; WEI, GUOFANG, Hausdorff convergence and universal covers. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 353
(2001), no. 9, 3585–3602.
[SW2] SORMANI, CHRISTINA; WEI, GUOFANG, Universal covers for Hausdorff limits of noncompact spaces. Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 356 (2004), no. 3, 1233–1270.
[St] STEENROD, NORMAN, The Topology of Fibre Bundles. Princeton Mathematical Series, vol. 14. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N. J., 1951. viii+224 pp.
[Vi] V I L M S , JA A K , Totally geodesic maps. J. Differential Geometry 4 (1970), 73–79.
[Wa] WANG, JIKANG, Ricci limit spaces are Semi-locally simply connected. Preprint arXiv:2104.02460 (2021).
[WZ] WANG, MCKENZIE Y.; ZILLER, WOLFGANG, Einstein metrics on principal torus bundles. J. Differential Geom. 31
(1990), no. 1, 215–248.
[We] WEI, GUOFANG, Examples of complete manifolds of positive Ricci curvature with nilpotent isometry group Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. 19 (1988) 311–313.
[Wi] WILKING, BURKHARD, On fundamental groups of manifolds of nonnegative curvature. Differential Geom. Appl. 13
(2000), no. 2, 129–165.
[Wu] WU, BING YE, On the fundamental group of Riemannian manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature. Geom. Dedicata
162 (2013), 337–344.
